Whoa! Thank you! Thank you, Salem! …Thank you! Salem, thank you! And it sure sounds like Salem, Oregon is ready for the political revolution! This is a great turnout, and I want to thank all of you for being here.  Let me begin by giving you all some pretty good news.  Last week, last week we won a really great victory in Indiana. And tonight, it appears that we’ve won a big, big victory in West Virginia! And with your help, we’re going to win in Oregon next week.  And I want to take a moment to thank the people of West Virginia for a tremendous victory. I think it ends up being a double-digit victory tonight. And this is a state – West Virginia – where Hillary Clinton won by over 40 points against Barack Obama in 2008.  West Virginia is a working class state and like many other states in this country, including Oregon, working people are hurting.  And what the people of West Virginia said tonight and I believe the people of Oregon and Kentucky will say next week is that we need an economy that works for all of us, not just the 1%.  People of this country are sick and tired of working two or three jobs. They are tired of working longer hours for lower wages. They are worried to death about the future of their kids. And they do not want to see almost all new wealth and income going to the top 1%.   The people of West Virginia, of Kentucky, of Oregon want an economy that works for all of us.  They want to have the United States join every other major country and guarantee health care to all people as a right.  They want to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure and create 13 million jobs.  And the people of West Virginia and the people of Kentucky and the people of Oregon understand that in the year 2016 we have got to make public colleges and universities tuition-free.  And at a time of massive income and wealth inequality where the top 0.1% now owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90%, the people of Oregon and Kentucky and West Virginia know that it is high time for the wealthy and large corporations to start paying their fair share of taxes.  With our victory tonight in West Virginia, we have now won primaries and caucuses in 19 states.  And let me be as clear as I can be. We are in this campaign to win the Democratic nomination.  And we are going to fight for every last vote in Oregon, Kentucky, California, the Dakotas.  Now, we fully acknowledge – we are good at arithmetic – that we have an uphill climb ahead of us. But we are used to fighting uphill climbs.  We have been fighting uphill from the first day of this campaign when people considered us a fringe candidacy.   And our message to the Democratic delegates who will be assembling in Philadelphia is while we may have many disagreements with Secretary Clinton, there is one area we agree and that is we must defeat Donald Trump.  And I am very happy to tell you we will defeat Donald Trump.  And if you look over the last month or six weeks in every nation poll, Bernie Sanders defeats Donald Trump by big numbers.  But it is not only national polls where we defeat Trump by bigger numbers than Secretary Clinton. It is state poll after state poll after state poll.  Just in the last day, two national polls have us beating Trump by bigger margins than Secretary Clinton. Four statewide polls – in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Florida, and New Hampshire – in every one of those polls, we beat Trump or do better against Trump than does Secretary Clinton.  But the reason that our campaign is the strongest campaign against Trump is not just the polls. It is that our campaign is generating the energy and the enthusiasm that we need to have a large voter turnout in November.  Democrats and progressive win national elections when the voter turnout is high, when millions of people are prepared to stand up and fight back. That is what our campaign is all about.  I am very proud to tell you that taking on virtually the entire Democratic establishment – senators and governors and members of Congress and mayors.  Despite all of that opposition, we have now received well over 45% of the pledged delegates.  And if we do well in the coming weeks in Oregon, in California, in New Jersey, in Kentucky and the other states, we still have that road to victory in winning the majority of pledged delegates.  Let me mention something else that doesn’t get a lot of attention but that I am very, very proud of. In virtually every primary and caucus, we win the significant majority of people 45 years of age and younger.  Now, the truth is that we are going to work on this. We have to do better with older voters.   And we are going to do better with voters.  But when we win, in state after state, a significant majority of younger voters.  What that tells me and I think it tells the American people our vision of economic, social, racial, and environmental justice is the future of America. Our vision is the future of America and the future of the Democratic Party.  Now, Donald Trump is not going to become president for a number of reasons. And the major reason is that the American people understand that we cannot have a president who has insulted Latinos and Mexicans, who has insulted Muslims, who everyday is insulting women in one way or another, who has insulted veterans like John McCain and others, who has insulted African-Americans in a very profound way.  People sometimes forget that before Mr. Trump was running for president, he was one of the leaders of the so-called birther movement. And that movement was a very ugly effort to de-legitimize the presidency of the first African-American president in our history.  Mr. Trump will not become president because the American people understands that our strength is in our diversity, that we are a great nation because we are black and white and Latino and Asian-American and Native-Americans.  We are a great nation because we are gay and we are straight.  We are a great nation because we are women and men.  And our greatness and our strength is when we come together as one proud people.  And the American people understand that bringing us together always trumps dividing us up.   