[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below   transcribed directly from audio] Thank you, Governor. To all the   families, first responders, to the community of Newtown, clergy, guests   --   Scripture tells us: Do not lose heart. Though outwardly we are wasting   away, inwardly, we are being renewed day by day.For light and momentary troubles are achieving for us an eternal glory   that far outweighs them all, so we fix our eyes not on what is seen, but   on what is unseen, since what is seen is temporary, but what is unseen   is eternal.For we know that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed, we have a   building from God, an eternal house in heaven not built by human hands. We gather here in memory of twenty   beautiful children and six remarkable adults. They lost their lives in a school   that could have been any school; in a quiet town full of good and decent people   that could be any town in America. Here in Newtown, I come to offer the   love and prayers of a nation. I am very mindful that mere words cannot match   the depths of your sorrow, nor can they heal your wounded hearts. I can only   hope it helps for you to know that youre not alone in your grief; that our   world too has been torn apart; that all across this land of ours, we have wept   with you, weve pulled our children tight. And you must know that whatever   measure of comfort we can provide, we will provide; whatever portion of sadness   that we can share with you to ease this heavy load, we will gladly bear it. Newtown -- you are not alone. As these difficult days have   unfolded, youve also inspired us with stories of strength and resolve and   sacrifice. We know that when danger arrived in the halls of Sandy Hook   Elementary, the schools staff did not flinch, they did not hesitate. Dawn   Hochsprung and Mary Sherlach, Vicki Soto, Lauren Rousseau, Rachel Davino and   Anne Marie Murphy -- they responded as we all hope we might respond in such   terrifying circumstances -- with courage and with love, giving their lives to   protect the children in their care. We know that there were other   teachers who barricaded themselves inside classrooms, and kept steady through it   all, and reassured their students by saying "wait for the good guys, theyre   coming"; "show me your smile." And we know that good guys came.   The first responders who raced to the scene, helping to guide those in harms   way to safety, and comfort those in need, holding at bay their own shock and   trauma because they had a job to do, and others needed them more. And then there were the scenes of   the schoolchildren, helping one another, holding each other, dutifully following   instructions in the way that young children sometimes do; one child even trying   to encourage a grown-up by saying, "I know karate. So its okay. Ill lead the   way out." As a community, youve inspired us,   Newtown. In the face of indescribable violence, in the face of unconscionable   evil, youve looked out for each other, and youve cared for one another, and   youve loved one another. This is how Newtown will be remembered. And with   time, and Gods grace, that love will see you through. But we, as a nation, we are left   with some hard questions. Someone once described the joy and anxiety of   parenthood as the equivalent of having your heart outside of your body all the   time, walking around. With their very first cry, this most precious, vital part   of ourselves -- our child -- is suddenly exposed to the world, to possible   mishap or malice. And every parent knows there is nothing we will not do to   shield our children from harm. And yet, we also know that with that childs   very first step, and each step after that, they are separating from us; that we   wont -- that we cant always be there for them. Theyll suffer sickness and   setbacks and broken hearts and disappointments. And we learn that our most   important job is to give them what they need to become self-reliant and capable   and resilient, ready to face the world without fear. And we know we cant do this by   ourselves. It comes as a shock at a certain point where you realize, no matter   how much you love these kids, you cant do it by yourself. That this job of   keeping our children safe, and teaching them well, is something we can only do   together, with the help of friends and neighbors, the help of a community, and   the help of a nation. And in that way, we come to realize that we bear a   responsibility for every child because were counting on everybody else to help   look after ours; that were all parents; that theyre all our children. This is our first task -- caring for   our children. Its our first job. If we dont get that right, we dont get   anything right. Thats how, as a society, we will be judged. And by that measure, can we truly   say, as a nation, that we are meeting our obligations? Can we honestly say that   were doing enough to keep our children -- all of them -- safe from harm? Can   we claim, as a nation, that were all together there, letting them know that   they are loved, and teaching them to love in return? Can we say that were   truly doing enough to give all the children of this country the chance they   deserve to live out their lives in happiness and with purpose? Ive been reflecting on this the   last few days, and if were honest with ourselves, the answer is no. Were not   doing enough. And we will have to change. Since Ive been President, this is   the fourth time we have come together to comfort a grieving community torn apart   by a mass shooting. The fourth time weve hugged survivors. The fourth time   weve consoled the families of victims. And in between, there have been an   endless series of deadly shootings across the country, almost daily reports of   victims, many of them children, in small towns and big cities all across America   -- victims whose -- much of the time, their only fault was being in the wrong   place at the wrong time. We cant tolerate this anymore.   These tragedies must end. And to end them, we must change. We will be told   that the causes of such violence are complex, and that is true. No single law   -- no set of laws can eliminate evil from the world, or prevent every senseless   act of violence in our society. But that cant be an excuse for   inaction. Surely, we can do better than this. If there is even one step we can   take to save another child, or another parent, or another town, from the grief   that has visited Tucson, and Aurora, and Oak Creek, and Newtown, and communities   from Columbine to Blacksburg before that -- then surely we have an obligation to   try. In the coming weeks, I will use   whatever power this office holds to engage my fellow citizens -- from law   enforcement to mental health professionals to parents and educators -- in an   effort aimed at preventing more tragedies like this. Because what choice do we   have? We cant accept events like this as routine. Are we really prepared to   say that were powerless in the face of such carnage, that the politics are too   hard? Are we prepared to say that such violence visited on our children year   after year after year is somehow the price of our freedom? All the worlds religions -- so many   of them represented here today -- start with a simple question: Why are we   here? What gives our life meaning? What gives our acts purpose? We know our   time on this Earth is fleeting. We know that we will each have our share of   pleasure and pain; that even after we chase after some earthly goal, whether   its wealth or power or fame, or just simple comfort, we will, in some fashion,   fall short of what we had hoped. We know that no matter how good our   intentions, we will all stumble sometimes, in some way. We will make mistakes,   we will experience hardships. And even when were trying to do the right thing,   we know that much of our time will be spent groping through the darkness, so   often unable to discern Gods heavenly plans. Theres only one thing we can be   sure of, and that is the love that we have -- for our children, for our   families, for each other. The warmth of a small childs embrace -- that is   true. The memories we have of them, the joy that they bring, the wonder we see   through their eyes, that fierce and boundless love we feel for them, a love that   takes us out of ourselves, and binds us to something larger -- we know thats   what matters. We know were always doing right when were taking care of them,   when were teaching them well, when were showing acts of kindness. We dont go   wrong when we do that. Thats what we can be sure of. And   thats what you, the people of Newtown, have reminded us. Thats how youve   inspired us. You remind us what matters. And thats what should drive us   forward in everything we do, for as long as God sees fit to keep us on this   Earth. Let the little children come to   me, Jesus said, and do not hinder them -- for to such belongs the kingdom of   heaven. Charlotte. Daniel. Olivia.   Josephine. Ana. Dylan. Madeleine. Catherine. Chase. Jesse. James.   Grace. Emilie. Jack. Noah. Caroline. Jessica. Benjamin. Avielle.   Allison. God has called them all home. For   those of us who remain, let us find the strength to carry on, and make our   country worthy of their memory. May God bless and keep those weve   lost in His heavenly place. May He grace those we still have with His holy   comfort. And may He bless and watch over this community, and the United States   of America.    Text, Audio, Images (Screenshots) Source:     Copyright Status: Text, Audio, Images = Public domain.