[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below   transcribed directly from audio]   Good afternoon. This is the most wonderful press conference of the   year. I've got a list of whos been naughty and nice to call on.   But let me first make a couple of quick points, and then   Ill take your questions.   Typically, I use this yearend press conference to review how far weve   come over the course of the year. Today, understandably, I'm going to   talk a little bit about how far weve come over the past eight years.   As I was preparing to take office, the unemployment rate was on its way   to 10 percent. Today, its at 4.6 percent -- the lowest in nearly a   decade. Weve seen the longest streak of job growth on record, and   wages have grown faster over the past few years than at any time in the   past 40.   When I came into office, 44 million people were uninsured. Today, weve   covered more than 20 million of them. For the first time in our   history, more than 90 percent of Americans are insured. In fact,   yesterday was the biggest day ever for HealthCare.gov. More than   670,000 Americans signed up to get covered, and more are signing up by   the day.   Weve cut our dependence on foreign oil by more than half, doubled   production of renewable energy, enacted the most sweeping reforms since   FDR to protect consumers and prevent a crisis on Wall Street from   punishing Main Street ever again. None of these actions stifled growth,   as critics predicted. Instead, the stock market has nearly tripled.   Since I signed ObamaCare into law, our businesses have added more than   15 million new jobs. And the economy is undoubtedly more durable than   it was in the days when we relied on oil from unstable nations and banks   took risky bets with your money.   Add it all up, and last year, the poverty rate fell at the fastest rate   in almost 50 years, while the median household income grew at the   fastest rate on record. In fact, income gains were actually larger for   households at the bottom and the middle than for those at the top. And   weve done all this while cutting our deficits by nearly two-thirds and   protecting vital investments that grow the middle class.   In foreign policy, when I came into office, we were in the midst of two   wars. Now, nearly 180,000 troops are down to 15,000. Bin Laden, rather   than being at large, has been taken off the battlefield, along with   thousands of other terrorists. Over the past eight years, no foreign   terrorist organization has successfully executed an attack on our   homeland that was directed from overseas.   Through diplomacy, weve ensured that Iran cannot obtain a nuclear   weapon -- without going to war with Iran. We opened up a new chapter   with the people of Cuba. And we brought nearly 200 nations together   around a climate agreement that could very well save this planet for our   kids. And almost every country on Earth sees America as stronger and   more respected today than they did eight years ago.  In other words, by so many measures, our country is stronger and more   prosperous than it was when we started.   That's a situation that Im   proud to leave for my successor.   And its thanks to the American people   -- to the hard work that youve put in, the sacrifices youve made for   your families and your communities, the businesses that you started or   invested in, the way you looked out for one another. And I could not be   prouder to be your President.   Of course, to tout this progress doesnt mean that were not mindful of   how much more there is to do. In this season in particular, were   reminded that there are people who are still hungry, people who are   still homeless; people who still have trouble paying the bills or   finding work after being laid off. There are communities that are still   mourning those who have been stolen from us by senseless gun violence,   and parents who still are wondering how to protect their kids. And   after I leave office, I intend to continue to work with organizations   and citizens doing good across the country on these and other pressing   issues to build on the progress that weve made.   Around the world, as well, there are hotspots where disputes have been   intractable, conflicts have flared up, and people -- innocent people are   suffering as a result. And nowhere is this more terribly true than in   the city of Aleppo. For years, weve worked to stop the civil war in   Syria and alleviate human suffering. It has been one of the hardest   issues that I've faced as President.   The world, as we speak, is united in horror at the savage assault by the   Syrian regime and its Russian and Iranian allies on the city of Aleppo.   We have seen a deliberate strategy of surrounding, besieging, and   starving innocent civilians. We've seen relentless targeting of   humanitarian workers and medical personnel; entire neighborhoods reduced   to rubble and dust. There are continuing reports of civilians being   executed. These are all horrific violations of international law.   Responsibility for this brutality lies in one place alone -- with the   Assad regime and its allies Russia and Iran. And this blood and these   atrocities are on their hands.   We all know what needs to happen. There needs to be an impartial   international observer force in Aleppo that can help coordinate an   orderly evacuation through safe corridors. There has to be full access   for humanitarian aid, even as the United States continues to be the   worlds largest donor of humanitarian aid to the Syrian people. And,   beyond that, there needs to be a broader ceasefire that can serve as the   basis for a political rather than a military solution.   Thats what the United States is going to continue to push for, both   with our partners and through multilateral institutions like the U.N.   Regretfully, but unsurprisingly, Russia has repeatedly blocked the   Security Council from taking action on these issues. So were going to   keep pressing the Security Council to help improve the delivery of   humanitarian aid to those who are in such desperate need, and to ensure   accountability, including continuing to monitor any potential use of   chemical weapons in Syria. And were going to work in the U.N. General   Assembly as well, both on accountability and to advance a political   settlement. Because it should be clear that although you may achieve   tactical victories, over the long term the Assad regime cannot slaughter   its way to legitimacy.   Thats why we'll continue to press for a transition to a more   representative government. And thats why the world must not avert our   eyes to the terrible events that are unfolding. The Syrian regime and   its Russian and Iranian allies are trying to obfuscate the truth. The   world should not be fooled. And the world will not forget.   So even in a season where the incredible blessings that we know as   Americans are all around us, even as we enjoy family and friends and are   reminded of how lucky we are, we should also be reminded that to be an   American involves bearing burdens and meeting obligations to others.   American values and American ideals are what will lead the way to a   safer and more prosperous 2017, both here and abroad.   And by the way, few embody those values and ideals like our brave men   and women in uniform and their families. So I just want to close by   wishing all of them a very Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.   With that, I will take some questions. And I'm going to start with Josh   Lederman, of AP.  Question: Thank you, Mr. President.   Theres a perception that you're letting President Putin get away with   interfering in the U.S. election, and that a response that nobody knows   about or a lookback review just wont cut it. Are you prepared to call   out President Putin by name for ordering this hacking? And do you agree   with what Hillary Clinton now says, that the hacking was actually partly   responsible for her loss? And is your Administrations open quarreling   with Trump and his team on this issue tarnishing the smooth transition   of power that you have promised?  President Obama: Well, first of all, with respect to the transition, I   think they would be the first to acknowledge that we have done   everything we can to make sure that they are successful as I promised.   And that will continue. And its just been a few days since I last   talked to the President-elect about a whole range of transition issues.   That cooperation is going to continue.   There hasnt been a lot of squabbling. What weve simply said is the   facts, which are that, based on uniform intelligence assessments, the   Russians were responsible for hacking the DNC, and that, as a   consequence, it is important for us to review all elements of that and   make sure that we are preventing that kind of interference through   cyberattacks in the future.   That should be a bipartisan issue; that shouldnt be a partisan issue.   And my hope is that the President-elect is going to similarly be   concerned with making sure that we dont have potential foreign   influence in our election process. I dont think any American wants   that. And that shouldnt be a source of an argument.   I think that part of the challenge is that it gets caught up in the   carryover from election season. And I think it is very important for us   to distinguish between the politics of the election and the need for us,   as a country, both from a national security perspective but also in   terms of the integrity of our election system and our democracy, to make   sure that we dont create a political football here.   Now, with respect to how this thing unfolded last year, lets just go   through the facts pretty quickly. At the beginning of the summer, were   alerted to the possibility that the DNC has been hacked, and I   immediately order law enforcement as well as our intelligence teams to   find out everything about it, investigate it thoroughly, to brief the   potential victims of this hacking, to brief on a bipartisan basis the   leaders of both the House and the Senate and the relevant intelligence   committees. And once we had clarity and certainty around what, in fact,   had happened, we publicly announced that, in fact, Russia had hacked   into the DNC.   And at that time, we did not attribute motives or any interpretations of   why they had done so. We didnt discuss what the effects of it might   be. We simply let people know -- the public know, just as we had let   members of Congress know -- that this had happened.   And as a consequence, all of you wrote a lot of stories about both what   had happened, and then you interpreted why that might have happened and   what effect it was going to have on the election outcomes. We did not.   And the reason we did not was because in this hyper-partisan   atmosphere, at a time when my primary concern was making sure that the   integrity of the election process was not in any way damaged, at a time   when anything that was said by me or anybody in the White House would   immediately be seen through a partisan lens, I wanted to make sure that   everybody understood we were playing this thing straight -- that we   werent trying to advantage one side or another, but what we were trying   to do was let people know that this had taken place, and so if you   started seeing effects on the election, if you were trying to measure   why this was happening and how you should consume the information that   was being leaked, that you might want to take this into account.   And that's exactly how we should have handled it. Imagine if we had   done the opposite. It would have become immediately just one more   political scrum. And part of the goal here was to make sure that we did   not do the work of the leakers for them by raising more and more   questions about the integrity of the election right before the election   was taking place -- at a time, by the way, when the President-elect   himself was raising questions about the integrity of the election.   And, finally, I think it's worth pointing out that the information was   already out. It was in the hands of WikiLeaks, so that was going to   come out no matter what. What I was concerned about, in particular, was   making sure that that wasnt compounded by potential hacking that could   hamper vote counting, affect the actual election process itself.   And so in early September, when I saw President Putin in China, I felt   that the most effective way to ensure that that didnt happen was to   talk to him directly and tell him to cut it out, and there were going to   be some serious consequences if he didnt. And, in fact, we did not see   further tampering of the election process. But the leaks through   WikiLeaks had already occurred.   So when I look back in terms of how we handled it, I think we handled it   the way it should have been handled. We allowed law enforcement and the   intelligence community to do its job without political influence. We   briefed all relevant parties involved in terms of what was taking place.   When we had a consensus around what had happened, we announced it --   not through the White House, not through me, but rather through the   intelligence communities that had actually carried out these   investigations. And then we allowed you and the American public to make   an assessment as to how to weigh that going into the election.   And the truth is, is that there was nobody here who didnt have some   sense of what kind of effect it might have. I'm finding it a little   curious that everybody is suddenly acting surprised that this looked   like it was disadvantaging Hillary Clinton because you guys wrote about   it every day. Every single leak. About every little juicy tidbit of   political gossip -- including John Podesta's risotto recipe. This was   an obsession that dominated the news coverage.   So I do think it's worth us reflecting how it is that a presidential   election of such importance, of such moment, with so many big issues at   stake and such a contrast between the candidates, came to be dominated   by a bunch of these leaks. What is it about our political system that   made us vulnerable to these kinds of potential manipulations -- which,   as I've said publicly before, were not particularly sophisticated.   This was not some elaborate, complicated espionage scheme. They hacked   into some Democratic Party emails that contained pretty routine stuff,   some of it embarrassing or uncomfortable, because I suspect that if any   of us got our emails hacked into, there might be some things that we   wouldnt want suddenly appearing on the front page of a newspaper or a   telecast, even if there wasnt anything particularly illegal or   controversial about it. And then it just took off.   And that concerns me. And it should concern all of us. But the truth   of the matter is, is that everybody had the information. It was out   there. And we handled it the way we should have.   Now, moving forward, I think there are a couple of issues that this   raises. Number one is just the constant challenge that we are going to   have with cybersecurity throughout our economy and throughout our   society. We are a digitalized culture, and there is hacking going on   every single day. Theres not a company, theres not a major   organization, theres not a financial institution, theres not a branch   of our government where somebody is not going to be phishing for   something or trying to penetrate, or put in a virus or malware. And   this is why for the last eight years, Ive been obsessed with how do we   continually upgrade our cybersecurity systems.   And this particular concern around Russian hacking is part of a broader   set of concerns about how do we deal with cyber issues being used in   ways that can affect our infrastructure, affect the stability of our   financial systems, and affect the integrity of our institutions, like   our election process.   I just received a couple weeks back -- it wasnt widely reported on -- a   report from our cybersecurity commission that outlines a whole range of   strategies to do a better job on this. But its difficult, because its   not all housed -- the target of cyberattacks is not one entity but its   widely dispersed, and a lot of it is private, like the DNC. Its not a   branch of government. We cant tell people what to do. What we can do   is inform them, get best practices.   What we can also do is to, on a bilateral basis, warn other countries   against these kinds of attacks. And weve done that in the past. So   just as I told Russia to stop it, and indicated there will be   consequences when they do it, the Chinese have, in the past, engaged in   cyberattacks directed at our companies to steal trade secrets and   proprietary technology. And I had to have the same conversation with   Prime Minister -- or with President Xi, and what weve seen is some   evidence that they have reduced -- but not completely eliminated --   these activities, partly because they can use cutouts.   One of the problems with the Internet and cyber issues is that theres   not always a return address, and by the time you catch up to it,   attributing what happened to a particular government can be difficult,   not always provable in court even though our intelligence communities   can make an assessment.   What weve also tried to do is to start creating some international   norms about this to prevent some sort of cyber arms race, because we   obviously have offensive capabilities as well as defensive capabilities.   And my approach is not a situation in which everybody is worse off   because folks are constantly attacking each other back and forth, but   putting some guardrails around the behavior of nation-states, including   our adversaries, just so that they understand that whatever they do to   us we can potentially do to them.   We do have some special challenges, because oftentimes our economy is   more digitalized, it is more vulnerable, partly because were a   wealthier nation and were more wired than some of these other   countries. And we have a more open society, and engage in less control   and censorship over what happens over the Internet, which is also part   of what makes us special.   Last point -- and the reason Im going on here is because I know that   you guys have a lot of questions about this, and I haven't addressed all   of you directly about it. With respect to response, my principal goal   leading up to the election was making sure that the election itself went   off without a hitch, that it was not tarnished, and that it did not feed   any sense in the public that somehow tampering had taken place with the   actual process of voting. And we accomplished that.   That does not mean that we are not going to respond. It simply meant   that we had a set of priorities leading up to the election that were of   the utmost importance. Our goal continues to be to send a clear message   to Russia or others not to do this to us, because we can do stuff to   you.   But it is also important for us to do that in a thoughtful, methodical   way. Some of it we do publicly. Some of it we will do in a way that   they know, but not everybody will. And I know that there have been   folks out there who suggest somehow that if we went out there and made   big announcements, and thumped our chests about a bunch of stuff, that   somehow that would potentially spook the Russians. But keep in mind   that we already have enormous numbers of sanctions against the Russians.   The relationship between us and Russia has deteriorated, sadly,   significantly over the last several years. And so how we approach an   appropriate response that increases costs for them for behavior like   this in the future, but does not create problems for us, is something   thats worth taking the time to think through and figure out. And   thats exactly what weve done.   So at a point in time where weve taken certain actions that we can   divulge publically, we will do so. There are times where the message   will go -- will be directly received by the Russians and not publicized.   And I should point out, by the way, part of why the Russians have been   effective on this is because they don't go around announcing what   they're doing. It's not like Putin is going around the world publically   saying, look what we did, wasn't that clever? He denies it. So the   idea that somehow public shaming is going to be effective I think   doesn't read the thought process in Russia very well.   Okay?  Question: Did Clinton lose because of the hacking?  President Obama: I'm going to let all the political pundits in this town   have a long discussion about what happened in the election. It was a   fascinating election, so I'm sure there are going to be a lot of books   written about it.   I've said what I think is important for the Democratic Party going   forward rather than try to parse every aspect of the election. And I've   said before, I couldn't be prouder of Secretary Clinton, her outstanding   service. I thinks she's worked tirelessly on behalf of the American   people, and I don't think she was treated fairly during the election. I   think the coverage of her and the issues was troubling.   But having said that, what I've been most focused on -- appropriate for   the fact that I'm not going to be a politician in about, what is it, 32   days? 31?  Question: Thirty-four.  President Obama: Thirty four? But what I've said is, is   that I can maybe give some counsel and advice to the Democratic Party.   And I think that that the thing we have to spend the most time on --   because it's the thing we have the most control over -- is how do we   make sure that we are showing up in places where I think Democratic   policies are needed, where they are helping, where they are making a   difference, but where people feel as if they're not being heard and   where Democrats are characterized as coastal, liberal, latte-sipping,   politically-correct, out-of-touch folks. We have to be in those   communities. And I've seen that when we are in those communities, it   makes a difference.   That's how I became President. I became a U.S. senator not just because   I had a strong base in Chicago, but because I was driving around   downstate Illinois and going to fish frys and sitting in VFW halls and   talking to farmers. And I didn't win every one of their votes, but they   got a sense of what I was talking about, what I cared about, that I was   for working people, that I was for the middle class, that the reason I   was interested in strengthening unions, and raising the minimum wage,   and rebuilding our infrastructure, and making sure that parents had   decent childcare and family leave was because my own family's history   wasn't that different from theirs, even if I looked a little bit   different. Same thing in Iowa.   And so the question is, how do we rebuild that party as a whole so that   there's not a county in any state -- I don't care how red -- that we   don't have a presence and we're not making the argument. Because I   think we have the better argument. But that requires a lot of work.   It's been something that I've been able to do successfully in my own   campaigns. It is not something I've been able to transfer to candidates   in midterms and sort of build a sustaining organization around. That's   something that I would have liked to have done more of, but it's kind of   hard to do when you're also dealing with a whole bunch of issues here in   the White House.   And that doesn't mean, though, that it can't be done. And I think there   are going to be a lot of talented folks out there, a lot of progressives   who share my values who are going to be leading the charge in the years   to come.   Michelle Kosinski of CNN.  Question: Thank you. So this week we heard Hillary Clinton talk about how   she thinks that the FBI Director's most recent announcement made a   difference in the outcome of the election. And we also just heard in an   op-ed her campaign chairman talk about something being deeply broken   within the FBI. He talked about thinking that the investigation early   on was lackadaisical in his words. So what do you think about those   comments? Do you think there's any truth to them? Do you think there's   a danger there that they're calling into question the integrity of   institutions in a similar way that Donald Trump's team has done?   And the second part to that is that Donald Trump's team repeatedly -- I   guess, giving the indication that the investigation of the Russian hack,   as well as the retaliation, might not be such a priority once he's in   office, so what do you think the risk is there? And are you going to   talk to him directly about some of those comments he made?  President Obama: Well, on the latter point, as I said before, the   transition from election season to governance season is not always   smooth. It's bumpy. There are still feelings that are raw out there.   There are people who are still thinking about how things unfolded. And   I get all that. But when Donald Trump takes the Oath of Office and is   sworn as the 45th President of the United States, then he's got a   different set of responsibilities and considerations.   And I've said this before: I think there is a sobering process when you   walk into the Oval Office. And I havent shared previously private   conversations I've had with the President-elect. I will say that they   have been cordial and, in some cases, have involved me making some   pretty specific suggestions about how to ensure that regardless of our   obvious deep disagreements about policy, maybe I can transmit some   thoughts about maintaining the effectiveness, integrity, cohesion of the   office, of various democratic institutions. And he has listened. I   can't say that he will end up implementing, but the conversations   themselves have been cordial as opposed to defensive in any way. And I   will always make myself available to him, just as previous Presidents   have made themselves available to me as issues come up.   With respect to the FBI, I will tell you, I've had a chance to know a   lot of FBI agents, I know Director Comey, and they take their job   seriously, they work really hard, they help keep us safe and save a lot   of lives. And it is always a challenge for law enforcement when there's   an intersection between the work that they are doing and the political   system. It's one of the difficulties of democracy, generally. We have   a system where we want our law enforcement investigators and our   prosecutors to be free from politics, to be independent, to play it   straight, but sometimes that involves investigations that touch on   politics. And particularly in this hyper-partisan environment that   we've been in, everything is suspect, everything you do one way or the   other.   One thing that I have done is to be pretty scrupulous about not wading   into investigation decisions or prosecution decisions, or decisions not   to prosecute. I have tried to be really strict in my own behavior about   preserving the independence of law enforcement, free from my own   judgments and political assessments, in some cases. And I dont know   why it would stop now.   Mike Dorning of Bloomberg.  Question: Thank you, Mr. President. On Aleppo, your views that what happens   there is the responsibility of the Russian government, the Iranian   government, the Assad regime are pretty well aired. But do you, as   President of the United States, leader of the free world, feel any   personal moral responsibility now at the end of your presidency for the   carnage that were all watching in Aleppo, which Im sure disturbs you   -- which you said disturbs you?   And, secondly, also on Aleppo, youve again made clear your practical   disagreements with the idea of safe zones. And President-elect Trump   has, throughout his campaign, and he said again last night that he wants   to create safe zones in Syria. Do you feel like, in this transition,   you need to help him toward implementing that? Or was that not   something that you should be doing?  President Obama: Mike, I always feel responsible. I felt responsible   when kids were being shot by snipers. I felt responsible when millions   of people had been displaced. I feel responsible for murder and   slaughter thats taken place in South Sudan thats not being reported on   partly because theres not as much social media being generated from   there.   There are places around the world where horrible things are happening,   and because of my office, because Im President of the United States, I   feel responsible. I ask myself every single day, is there something I   could do that would save lives and make a difference and spare some   child who doesnt deserve to suffer.   So thats a starting point. Theres not a moment during the course of   this presidency where I havent felt some responsibility. Thats true,   by the way, for our own country. When I came into office and people   were losing their jobs and losing their homes and losing their pensions,   I felt responsible, and I would go home at night and I would ask myself,   was there something better that I could do or smarter that I could be   that would make a difference in their lives, that would relieve their   suffering and relieve their hardship.   So with respect to Syria, what I have consistently done is taken the   best course that I can to try to end the civil war while having also to   take into account the long-term national security interests of the   United States.   And throughout this process, based on hours of meetings, if you tallied   it up, days or weeks of meetings where we went through every option in   painful detail, with maps, and we had our military, and we had our aid   agencies, and we had our diplomatic teams, and sometimes wed bring in   outsiders who were critics of ours -- whenever we went through it, the   challenge was that, short of putting large numbers of U.S. troops on the   ground, uninvited, without any international law mandate, without   sufficient support from Congress, at a time when we still had troops in   Afghanistan and we still had troops in Iraq, and we had just gone   through over a decade of war and spent trillions of dollars, and when   the opposition on the ground was not cohesive enough to necessarily   govern a country, and you had a military superpower in Russia prepared   to do whatever it took to keeps its client-state involved, and you had a   regional military power in Iran that saw their own vital strategic   interests at stake and were willing to send in as many of their people   or proxies to support the regime -- that in that circumstance, unless we   were all in and willing to take over Syria, we were going to have   problems, and that everything else was tempting because we wanted to do   something and it sounded like the right thing to do, but it was going to   be impossible to do this on the cheap.   And in that circumstance, I have to make a decision as President of the   United States as to what is best -- Im sorry, whats going on?   Somebodys not feeling good? All right. Why dont we have -- weve   got -- we can get our doctors back there to help out. Does somebody   want to go to my doctors office and just have them -- all right --   where was I?  Question: Doing it on the cheap.  President Obama: So we couldnt do it on the cheap. Now, it may be --   Can somebody help out please and get Doc Jackson in here? Is somebody   grabbing our doctor?  Question: Thank you, Mr. President, for stopping.  President Obama: Of course. In the meantime, just give her a little   room. The doctor will be here in a second. You guys know where the   doctors office is? Just go through the Palm doors. Its right next to   the Map Room. There he is. All right, theres Doc Jackson. Hes all   right. Okay. The doctor is in the house.  Question: You were saying you couldnt do it on the cheap.  President Obama: And I dont mean that -- I mean that with all sincerity.   I understand the impulse to want to do something. But ultimately, what   Ive had to do is to think about what can we sustain, what is realistic.   And my first priority has to be whats the right thing to do for   America.   And it has been our view that the best thing to do has been to provide   some support to the moderate opposition so that they could sustain   themselves, and that we wouldnt see anti-Assad regime sentiments just   pouring into al Nusra and al Qaeda or ISIL; that we engaged our   international partners in order to put pressure on all the parties   involved, and to try to resolve this through diplomatic and political   means.   I cannot claim that weve been successful. And so thats something   that, as is true with a lot of issues and problems around the world, I   have to go to bed with every night. But I continue to believe that it   was the right approach, given what realistically we could get done   absent a decision, as I said, to go in a much more significant way. And   that, I think, would not have been sustainable or good for the American   people because we had a whole host of other obligations that we also had   to meet, wars we had already started and that were not yet finished.   With respect to the issue of safe zones, it is a continued problem. A   continued challenge with safe zones is if youre setting up those zones   on Syrian territory, then that requires some force that is willing to   maintain that territory in the absence of consent from the Syrian   government and, now, the Russians or the Iranians. So it may be that   with Aleppos tragic situation unfolding, that in the short term, if we   can get more of the tens of thousands who are still trapped there out,   that so long as the worlds eyes are on them and they are feeling   pressure, the regime and Russia concludes that they are willing to find   some arrangement, perhaps in coordination with Turkey, whereby those   people can be safe. Even that will probably be temporary, but at least   it solves a short-term issue thats going to arise.   Unfortunately, were not even there yet, because right now we have   Russians and Assad claiming that basically all the innocent civilians   who were trapped in Aleppo are out when international organizations,   humanitarian organizations who know better and who are on the ground   have said unequivocally that there are still tens of thousands who are   trapped and prepared to leave under pretty much any conditions. And so   right now, our biggest priority is to continue to put pressure wherever   we can to try to get them out.  Question: Notwithstanding --  President Obama: I cant have too much --  Question: On the second question, your intentions are well aired, but do you   feel responsibility notwithstanding a move in that direction or help   President-elect Trump move in that direction?  President Obama: I will help President Trump -- President-elect Trump   with any advice, counsel, information that we can provide so that he,   once hes sworn in, can make a decision. Between now and then, these   are decisions that I have to make based on the consultations I have with   our military and the people who have been working this every single day.   Peter Alexander.  Question: Mr. President, thank you very much. Can you, given all the   intelligence that we have now heard, assure the public that this was,   once and for all, a free and fair election? And specifically on Russia,   do you feel any obligation now, as theyve been insisting that this   isnt the case, to show the proof, as it were -- they say put your money   where your mouth is and declassify some of the intelligence, some of the   evidence that exists? And more broadly, as it relates to Donald Trump   on this very topic, are you concerned about his relationship with   Vladimir Putin, especially given some of the recent Cabinet picks,   including his selection for Secretary of State, Rex Tillerson, who   toasted Putin with champagne over oil deals together? Thank you.  President Obama: I may be getting older, because these multipart   questions, I start losing track.   I can assure the public that there was not the kind of tampering with   the voting process that was of concern and will continue to be of   concern going forward; that the votes that were cast were counted, they   were counted appropriately. We have not seen evidence of machines being   tampered with. So that assurance I can provide.   That doesnt mean that we find every single potential probe of every   single voting machine all across the country, but we paid a lot of   attention to it. We worked with state officials, et cetera, and we feel   confident that that didnt occur and that the votes were cast and they   were counted.   So thats on that point. What was the second one?  Question: The second one was about declassification.  President Obama: Declassification. Look, we will provide evidence that   we can safely provide that does not compromise sources and methods. But   Ill be honest with you, when youre talking about cybersecurity, a lot   of it is classified. And were not going to provide it because the way   we catch folks is by knowing certain things about them that they may not   want us to know, and if were going to monitor this stuff effectively   going forward, we dont want them to know that we know.   So this is one of those situations where unless the American people   genuinely think that the professionals in the CIA, the FBI, our entire   intelligence infrastructure -- many of whom, by the way, served in   previous Administrations and who are Republicans -- are less trustworthy   than the Russians, then people should pay attention to what our   intelligence agencies have to say.   This is part of what I meant when I said that weve got to think about   whats happening to our political culture here. The Russians cant   change us or significantly weaken us. They are a smaller country. They   are a weaker country. Their economy doesnt produce anything that   anybody wants to buy, except oil and gas and arms. They dont innovate.   But they can impact us if we lose track of who we are. They can impact   us if we abandon our values. Mr. Putin can weaken us, just like hes   trying to weaken Europe, if we start buying into notions that its okay   to intimidate the press, or lock up dissidents, or discriminate against   people because of their faith or what they look like.   And what I worry about more than anything is the degree to which,   because of the fierceness of the partisan battle, you start to see   certain folks in the Republican Party and Republican voters suddenly   finding a government and individuals who stand contrary to everything   that we stand for as being okay because thats how much we dislike   Democrats.   I mean, think about it. Some of the people who historically have been   very critical of me for engaging with the Russians and having   conversations with them also endorsed the President-elect, even as he   was saying that we should stop sanctioning Russia and being tough on   them, and work together with them against our common enemies. He was   very complimentary of Mr. Putin personally.   That wasnt news. The President-elect during the campaign said so. And   some folks who had made a career out of being anti-Russian didnt say   anything about it. And then after the election, suddenly theyre   asking, well, why didnt you tell us that maybe the Russians were trying   to help our candidate? Well, come on. There was a survey, some of you   saw, where -- now, this is just one poll, but a pretty credible source   -- 37 percent of Republican voters approve of Putin. Over a third of   Republican voters approve of Vladimir Putin, the former head of the KGB.   Ronald Reagan would roll over in his grave.   And how did that happen? It happened in part because, for too long,   everything that happens in this town, everything thats said is seen   through the lens of "does this help or hurt us relative to Democrats, or   relative to President Obama?" And unless that changes, were going to   continue to be vulnerable to foreign influence, because weve lost track   of what it is that were about and what we stand for.   With respect to the President-elects appointments, it is his   prerogative, as Ive always said, for him to appoint who he thinks can   best carry out his foreign policy or his domestic policy. It is up to   the Senate to advise and consent. There will be plenty of time for   members of the Senate to go through the record of all his appointees and   determine whether or not theyre appropriate for the job.   Martha Raddatz.  Question: Mr. President, I want to talk about Vladimir Putin again. Just to   be clear, do you believe Vladimir Putin himself authorized the hack?   And do you believe he authorized that to help Donald Trump? And on the   intelligence, one of the things Donald Trump cites is Saddam Hussein and   the weapons of mass destruction, and that they were never found. Can   you say, unequivocally, that this was not China, that this was not a   400-pound guy sitting on his bed, as Donald Trump says? And do these   types of tweets and kinds of statements from Donald Trump embolden the   Russians?  President Obama: When the report comes out, before I leave office, that   will have drawn together all the threads. And so I dont want to step   on their work ahead of time.   What I can tell you is that the intelligence that I have seen gives me   great confidence in their assessment that the Russians carried out this   hack.  Question: Which hack?  President Obama: The hack of the DNC and the hack of John Podesta.   Now, the -- but again, I think this is exactly why I want the report   out, so that everybody can review it. And this has been briefed, and   the evidence in closed session has been provided on a bipartisan basis   -- not just to me, its been provided to the leaders of the House and   the Senate, and the chairman and ranking members of the relevant   committees. And I think that what youve already seen is, at least some   of the folks who have seen the evidence dont dispute, I think, the   basic assessment that the Russians carried this out.  Question: But specifically, can you not say that --  President Obama: Well, Martha, I think what I want to make sure of is   that I give the intelligence community the chance to gather all the   information. But Id make a larger point, which is, not much happens in   Russia without Vladimir Putin. This is a pretty hierarchical operation.   Last I checked, theres not a lot of debate and democratic   deliberation, particularly when it comes to policies directed at the   United States.   We have said, and I will confirm, that this happened at the highest   levels of the Russian government. And I will let you make that   determination as to whether there are high-level Russian officials who   go off rogue and decide to tamper with the U.S. election process without   Vladimir Putin knowing about it.  Question: So I wouldnt be wrong in saying the President thinks Vladimir Putin authorized the hack?  President Obama: Martha, Ive given you what Im going to give you.   What was your second question?  Question: Do the tweets and do the statements by Donald Trump embolden   Russia?  President Obama: As I said before, I think that the President-elect is   still in transition mode from campaign to governance. I think he hasnt   gotten his whole team together yet. He still has campaign spokespersons   sort of filling in and appearing on cable shows. And theres just a   whole different attitude and vibe when youre not in power as when   youre in power.   So rather than me sort of characterize the appropriateness or   inappropriateness of what hes doing at the moment, I think what we have   to see is how will the President-elect operate, and how will his team   operate, when theyve been fully briefed on all these issues, they have   their hands on all the levers of government, and theyve got to start   making decisions.   One way I do believe that the President-elect can approach this that   would be unifying is to say that we welcome a bipartisan, independent   process that gives the American people an assurance not only that votes   are counted properly, that the elections are fair and free, but that we   have learned lessons about how Internet propaganda from foreign   countries can be released into the political bloodstream and that weve   got strategies to deal with it for the future.   The more this can be nonpartisan, the better served the American people   are going to be, which is why I made the point earlier -- and Im going   to keep on repeating this point: Our vulnerability to Russia or any   other foreign power is directly related to how divided, partisan,   dysfunctional our political process is. Thats the thing that makes us   vulnerable.   If fake news thats being released by some foreign government is almost   identical to reports that are being issued through partisan news venues,   then its not surprising that that foreign propaganda will have a   greater effect, because it doesnt seem that far-fetched compared to   some of the other stuff that folks are hearing from domestic   propagandists.   To the extent that our political dialogue is such where everything is   under suspicion, everybody is corrupt and everybody is doing things for   partisan reasons, and all of our institutions are full of malevolent   actors -- if thats the storyline thats being put out there by whatever   party is out of power, then when a foreign government introduces that   same argument with facts that are made up, voters who have been   listening to that stuff for years, who have been getting that stuff   every day from talk radio or other venues, theyre going to believe it.   So if we want to really reduce foreign influence on our elections, then   we better think about how to make sure that our political process, our   political dialogue is stronger than its been.   Mark Landler.  Question: Thank you, Mr. President. I wonder whether I can move you from   Russia to China for a moment.  President Obama: Absolutely.  Question: Your successor spoke by phone with the President of Taiwan the   other day and declared subsequently that he wasnt sure why the United   States needed to be bound by the one-China policy. He suggested it   could be used as a bargaining chip perhaps to get better terms on a   trade deal or more cooperation on North Korea. Theres already evidence   that tensions between the two sides have increased a bit, and just   today, the Chinese have evidently seized an underwater drone in the   South China Sea. Do you agree, as some do, that our China policy could   use a fresh set of eyes? And whats the big deal about having a short   phone call with the President of Taiwan? Or do you worry that these   types of unorthodox approaches are setting us on a collision course with   perhaps our biggest geopolitical adversary?  President Obama: Thats a great question. Im somewhere in between. I   think all of our foreign policy should be subject to fresh eyes. I   think one of the -- Ive said this before -- I am very proud of the work   Ive done. I think Im a better President now than when I started. But   if youre here for eight years, in the bubble, you start seeing things a   certain way and you benefit from -- the democracy benefits, America   benefits from some new perspectives.   And I think it should be not just the prerogative but the obligation of   a new President to examine everything thats been done and see what   makes sense and what doesnt. Thats what I did when I came in, and Im   assuming any new President is going to undertake those same exercises.   And given the importance of the relationship between the United States   and China, given how much is at stake in terms of the world economy,   national security, our presence in the Asia Pacific, Chinas increasing   role in international affairs -- theres probably no bilateral   relationship that carries more significance and where theres also the   potential if that relationship breaks down or goes into a full-conflict   mode, that everybody is worse off. So I think its fine for him to take   a look at it.   What Ive advised the President-elect is that across the board on   foreign policy, you want to make sure that youre doing it in a   systematic, deliberate, intentional way. And since theres only one   President at a time, my advice to him has been that before he starts   having a lot of interactions with foreign governments other than the   usual courtesy calls, that he should want to have his full team in   place, that he should want his team to be fully briefed on whats gone   on in the past and where the potential pitfalls may be, where the   opportunities are, what weve learned from eight years of experience, so   that as hes then maybe taking foreign policy in a new direction, hes   got all the information to make good decisions and, by the way, that all   of government is moving at the same time and singing from the same   hymnal.   And with respect to China -- and lets just take the example of Taiwan   -- there has been a longstanding agreement, essentially, between China,   the United States, and, to some degree, the Taiwanese, which is to not   change the status quo. Taiwan operates differently than mainland China   does. China views Taiwan as part of China, but recognizes that it has   to approach Taiwan as an entity that has its own ways of doing things.   The Taiwanese have agreed that as long as theyre able to continue to   function with some degree of autonomy, that they wont charge forward   and declare independence.   And that status quo, although not completely satisfactory to any of the   parties involved, has kept the peace and allowed the Taiwanese to be a   pretty successful economy and a people who have a high degree of   self-determination. But understand, for China, the issue of Taiwan is   as important as anything on their docket. The idea of one China is at   the heart of their conception as a nation.   And so if you are going to upend this understanding, you have to have   thought through what the consequences are, because the Chinese will not   treat that the way theyll treat some other issues. They wont even   treat it the way they treat issues around the South China Sea, where   weve had a lot of tensions. This goes to the core of how they see   themselves. And their reaction on this issue could end up being very   significant.   That doesnt mean that you have to adhere to everything thats been done   in the past. It does mean that youve got to think it through and have   planned for potential reactions that they may engage in.   All right. Isaac Dovere of Politico.  Question: Thank you, Mr. President. Two questions on where this all leaves   us.  President Obama: What leaves us? Where my presidency leaves us?  Question: The election --  President Obama: It leaves us in a really good spot -- if   we make some good decisions going forward.  Question: Well, what do you say to the electors who are going to meet on   Monday and are thinking of changing their votes? Do you think that they   should be given an intelligence briefing about the Russian activity? Or   should they bear in mind everything youve said and is out already?   Should they -- should votes be bound by the state votes as theyve   gone? And long term, do you think that there is a need for Electoral   College reform that would tie it to the popular vote?  President Obama: It sounded like two, but that was all one.  Question: It was all one. You know the way this goes around   here.  President Obama: I love how these -- I got two questions, each one has   four parts.  Question: On the Democratic Party, your Labor Secretary is running to be the   Chair of the Democratic National Committee. Is the vision that youve   seen him putting forward what you think the party needs to be focused   on? And what do you say to some of the complaints that say the future   of the Democratic Party shouldnt be a continuation of some of your   political approach? Part of that is complaints that decisions that   youve made as President, as the leader of the party, have structurally   weakened the DNC and the Democratic Party, and they think that that has   led to -- or has helped lead to some losses in elections around the   country. Do you regret any of those decisions?  President Obama: Okay.  Question: Those are my two.  President Obama: Good. Ill take the second one first and say that Tom   Perez has been, I believe, one of the best secretaries of labor in our   history. He is tireless. He is wicked smart. He has been able to work   across the spectrum of labor, business, activists. Hes produced. I   mean, if you look at his body of work on behalf of working people, what   hes pushed for in terms of making sure that workers get a fair deal,   decent wages, better benefits, that their safety is protected on the job   -- he has been extraordinary.   Now, others who have declared are also my friends and are fine people,   as well. And the great thing is, I dont have a vote in this, so well   let the process unfold. I dont think its going to happen anytime   soon. I described to you earlier what I think needs to happen, which is   that the Democratic Party, whether thats entirely through the DNC or   through a rebuilding of state parties or some other arrangement, has to   work at the grassroots level, has to be present in all 50 states, has to   have a presence in counties, has to think about message and how are we   speaking directly to voters.   I will say this -- and Im not going to engage in too much punditry --   but that I could not be prouder of the coalition that I put together in   each of my campaigns because it was inclusive, and it drew in people who   normally werent interested in politics and didnt participate. But Id   like to think -- I think I can show that in those elections, I always   cast a broad net. I always said, first and foremost were Americans,   that we have a common creed, that theres more that we share than   divides us, and I want to talk to everybody and get a chance to get   everybodys vote.   I still believe what I said in 2004, which is this red state/blue thing   is a construct. Now, it is a construct that has gotten more and more   powerful for a whole lot of reasons, from gerrymandering to big money,   to the way that media has splintered. And so people are just watching   what reinforces their existing biases as opposed to have to listen to   different points of view. So there are all kinds of reasons for it.   But outside of the realm of electoral politics, I still see people the   way I saw them when I made that speech -- full of contradictions, and   there are some regional differences, but basically folks care about   their families, they care about having meaningful work, they care about   making sure their kids have more opportunity than they did. They want   to be safe, they want to feel like things are fair. And whoever leads   the DNC and any candidate with the Democratic brand going forward, I   want them to feel as if they can reach out and find that common ground   -- speak to all of America. And that requires some organization.   And youre right that -- and I said this in my earlier remarks -- that   what I was able to do during my campaigns, I wasnt able to do during   midterms. Its not that we didnt put in time and effort into it. I   spent time and effort into it, but the coalition I put together didnt   always turn out to be transferable. And the challenge is that -- you   know, some of that just has to do with the fact that when youre in the   party in power and people are going through hard times like they were in   2010, theyre going to punish, to some degree, the Presidents party   regardless of what organizational work is done.   Some of it has to do with just some deep-standing traditional challenges   for Democrats, like during off-year election, the electorate is older   and we do better with a younger electorate. But we know those things   are true, and I didnt crack the code on that. And if other people have   ideas about how to do that even better, Im all for it.   So with respect to the electors, Im not going to wade into that issue   because, again, its the American peoples job, and now the electors'   job to decide my successor. It is not my job to decide my successor.   And I have provided people with a lot of information about what   happened during the course of the election. But more importantly, the   candidates themselves, I think, talked about their beliefs and their   vision for America. The President-elect, I think, has been very   explicit about what he cares about and what he believes in. So its not   in my hands now; its up to them.  Question: What about long-term about the Electoral College?  President Obama: Long-term with a respect to the Electoral College -- the   Electoral College is a vestige, its a carryover from an earlier vision   of how our federal government was going to work that put a lot of   premium on states, and it used to be that the Senate was not elected   directly, it was through state legislatures. And its the same type of   thinking that gives Wyoming two senators with about half a million   people, and California with 33 million get the same two.   So there are some structures in our political system, as envisioned by   the Founders, that sometimes are going to disadvantage Democrats. But   the truth of the matter is, is that, if we have a strong message, if   were speaking to what the American people care about, typically the   popular vote and the Electoral College vote will align.   And I guess part of my overall message here as I leave for the holidays   is that if we look for one explanation or one silver bullet or one easy   fix for our politics, then were probably going to be disappointed.   There are just a lot of factors in whats happened not just over the   last few months, but over the last decade that has made both politics   and governance more challenging. And I think everybody has raised   legitimate questions and legitimate concerns.   I do hope that we all just take some time, take a breath -- this is   certainly what Im going to advise Democrats -- to just reflect a little   bit more about how can we get to a place where people are focused on   working together based on at least some common set of facts. How can we   have a conversation about policy that doesnt demonize each other. How   can we channel what I think is the basic decency and goodness of the   American people so it reflects itself in our politics, as opposed to it   being so polarized and so nasty that, in some cases, you have voters and   elected officials who have more confidence and faith in a foreign   adversary than they have in their neighbors.   And those go to some bigger issues. How is it that we have some voters   or some elected officials who think that Michelle Obamas healthy eating   initiative and school nutrition program is a great threat to democracy   than our government going after the press if theyre issuing a story   they dont like? I mean, thats an issue that I think weve got to   wrestle with -- and we will.   People have asked me how do you feel after the election and so forth,   and I say, well, look, this is a clarifying moment. Its a useful   reminder that voting counts, politics counts. What the President-elect   is going to be doing is going to be very different than what I was   doing, and I think people will be able to compare and contrast and make   judgments about what worked for the American people.   And I hope that, building off the progress weve made, that what the   President-elect is proposing works. What I can say with confidence is   that what weve done works. That I can prove. I can show you where we   were in 2008 and I can show you where we are now, and you cant argue   that were not better off. We are. And for that, I thank the American   people and, more importantly, I thank -- well, not more importantly --   as importantly -- I was going to say Josh Earnest for doing such a great   job. For that, I thank the American people. I thank the men and women   in uniform who serve. I havent gotten to the point yet where Ive been   overly sentimental.   I will tell you, when I was doing my last Christmas party photoline --   many of you have participated in these; theyre pretty long -- right at   the end of the line, the Presidents Marine Corps Band comes in, those   who had been performing, and I take a picture when them, and it was the   last time that I was going to take a picture with my Marine Corps Band   after an event, and I got a little choked up. Now, I was in front of   Marines, so I had to, like, tamp it down.   But it was just one small example of all the people who have contributed   to our success. Im responsible for where weve screwed up. The   successes are widely shared with all the amazing people who have been   part of this Administration.   Thank you, everybody.   Mele Kalikimaka.    Text & Audio Source:   