[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio.] Good evening:  This is the 37th time I have spoken to you from this office, where somany decisions have been made that shape the history of this nation. Eachtime I have done so to discuss with you some matter that I believe affectedthe national interest. In all the decisions I have made in my public lifeI have always tried to do what was best for the nation. Throughout the long and difficult period of Watergate, I have felt itwas my duty to persevere -- to make every possible effort to complete theterm of office to which you elected me. In the past few days, however,it has become evident to me that I no longer have a strong enough politicalbase in the Congress to justify continuing that effort. As long as therewas such a base, I felt strongly that it was necessary to see the constitutionalprocess through to its conclusion; that to do otherwise would be unfaithfulto the spirit of that deliberately difficult process, and a dangerouslydestabilizing precedent for the future. But with the disappearance of thatbase, I now believe that the constitutional purpose has been served. Andthere is no longer a need for the process to be prolonged. I would have preferred to carry through to the finish whatever the personalagony it would have involved, and my family unanimously urged me to doso. But the interests of the nation must always come before any personalconsiderations. From the discussions I have had with Congressional andother leaders I have concluded that because of the Watergate matter I mightnot have the support of the Congress that I would consider necessary toback the very difficult decisions and carry out the duties of this officein the way the interests of the nation will require. I have never been a quitter. To leave office before my term is completed is abhorrent to every instinctin my body. But as President, I must put the interests of America first. America needs a full-time President and a full-time Congress, particularlyat this time with problems we face at home and abroad. To continue to fightthrough the months ahead for my personal vindication would almost totallyabsorb the time and attention of both the President and the Congress ina period when our entire focus should be on the great issues of peace abroadand prosperity without inflation at home. Therefore, I shall resign the Presidency effective at noon tomorrow. Vice President Ford will be sworn in as President at that hour in thisoffice. As I recall the high hopes for America with which we began this secondterm, I feel a great sadness that I will not be here in this office workingon your behalf to achieve those hopes in the next two and a half years.But in turning over direction of the Government to Vice President FordI know, as I told the nation when I nominated him for that office ten monthsago, that the leadership of America would be in good hands. In passing this office to the Vice President, I also do so with theprofound sense of the weight of responsibility that will fall on his shoulderstomorrow, and therefore of the understanding, the patience, the cooperationhe will need from all Americans. As he assumes that responsibility he willdeserve the help and the support of all of us. As we look to the future,the first essential is to begin healing the wounds of this nation. To putthe bitterness and divisions of the recent past behind us and to rediscoverthose shared ideals that lie at the heart of our strength and unity asa great and as a free people. By taking this action, I hope that I will have hastened the start ofthat process of healing which is so desperately needed in America. I regretdeeply any injuries that may have been done in the course of the eventsthat led to this decision. I would say only that if some of my judgmentswere wrong -- and some were wrong -- they were made in what I believedat the time to be the best interests of the nation. To those who have stood with me during these past difficult months,to my family, my friends, the many others who joined in supporting my causebecause they believed it was right, I will be eternally grateful for yoursupport. And to those who have not felt able to give me your support, letme say I leave with no bitterness toward those who have opposed me, becauseall of us in the final analysis have been concerned with the good of thecountry, however our judgments might differ. So let us all now join together in affirming that common commitmentand in helping our new President succeed for the benefit of all Americans.I shall leave this office with regret at not completing my term but withgratitude for the privilege of serving as your President for the past fiveand a half years. These years have been a momentous time in the historyof our nation and the world. They have been a time of achievement in whichwe can all be proud, achievements that represent the shared efforts ofthe administration, the Congress and the people. But the challenges aheadare equally great. And they, too, will require the support and the effortsof the Congress and the people, working in cooperation with the new Administration. We have ended America's longest war. But in the work of securing a lastingpeace in the world, the goals ahead are even more far-reaching and moredifficult. We must complete a structure of peace, so that it will be saidof this generation -- our generation of Americans -- by the people of allnations, not only that we ended one war but that we prevented future wars. We have unlocked the doors that for a quarter of a century stood betweenthe United States and the People's Republic of China. We must now insurethat the one-quarter of the world's people who live in the People's Republicof China will be and remain, not our enemies, but our friends. In the Middle East, 100 million people in the Arab countries, many ofwhom have considered us their enemy for nearly 20 years, now look on usas their friends. We must continue to build on that friendship so thatpeace can settle at last over the Middle East and so that the cradle ofcivilization will not become its grave. Together with the Soviet Unionwe have made the crucial breakthroughs that have begun the process of limitingnuclear arms. But, we must set as our goal, not just limiting, but reducingand finally destroying these terrible weapons, so that they cannot destroycivilization. And so that the threat of nuclear war will no longer hangover the world and the people. We have opened a new relation with the SovietUnion. We must continue to develop and expand that new relationship,so that the two strongest nations of the world will live together in cooperationrather than confrontation. Around the world -- in Asia, in Africa, in Latin America, in the MiddleEast -- there are millions of people who live in terrible poverty, evenstarvation. We must keep as our goal turning away from production for warand expanding production for peace so that people everywhere on this earthcan at last look forward, in their children's time, if not in our own time,to having the necessities for a decent life. Here, in America, we are fortunatethat most of our people have not only the blessings of liberty but alsothe means to live full and good, and by the world's standards even abundantlives. We must press on, however, toward a goal not only of more and betterjobs but of full opportunity for every American, and of what we are strivingso hard right now to achieve -- prosperity without inflation. For more than a quarter of a century in public life, I have shared inthe turbulent history of this evening. I have fought for what I believein. I have tried, to the best of my ability, to discharge those dutiesand meet those responsibilities that were entrusted to me. Sometimes Ihave succeeded. And sometimes I have failed. But always I have taken heartfrom what Theodore Roosevelt once said about the man in the arena, whoseface is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, whoerrs and comes short again and again because there is not effort withouterror and shortcoming, but who does actually strive to do the deed, whoknows the great enthusiasms, the great devotions, who spends himself ina worthy cause, who at the best knows in the end the triumphs of high achievementsand with the worst if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly. I pledge to you tonight that as long as I have a breath of life in mybody, I shall continue in that spirit. I shall continue to work for thegreat causes to which I have been dedicated throughout my years as a Congressman,a Senator, Vice President and President, the cause of peace -- not justfor America but among all nations -- prosperity, justice and opportunityfor all of our people. There is one cause above all to which I have been devoted and to whichI shall always be devoted for as long as I live. When I first took the oath of office as President five and a half yearsago, I made this sacred commitment: to consecrate my office, my energies,and all the wisdom I can summon to the cause of peace among nations. I'vedone my very best in all the days since to be true to that pledge. As aresult of these efforts, I am confident that the world is a safer placetoday, not only for the people of America but for the people of all nations,and that all of our children have a better chance than before of livingin peace rather than dying in war. This, more than anything, is what I hoped to achieve when I sought thePresidency. This, more than anything, is what I hope will be my legacy to you, toour country, as I leave the Presidency. To have served in this office is to have felt a very personal senseof kinship with each and every American. In leaving it, I do so with this prayer: May God's grace be with youin all the days ahead.  Also in this database: Richard M.       Nixon - "Cambodian Incursion Address" Copyright Status: 