My Fellow Americans,  I come before you tonight as a candidate for the Vice Presidency andas a man whose honesty and -- and integrity has been questioned. Now, the usual political thing to do when charges are made against youis to either ignore them or to deny them without giving details. I believewe've had enough of that in the United States, particularly with the presentAdministration in Washington, D.C.To me the office of the Vice Presidencyof the United States is a great office, and I feel that the people havegot to have confidence in the integrity of the men who run for that officeand who might obtain it. I have a theory, too, that the best and only answer to a smear or toan honest misunderstanding of the facts is to tell the truth. And that'swhy I'm here tonight. I want to tell you my side of the case. I'm surethat you have read the charge, and you've heard it, that I, Senator Nixon,took 18,000 dollars from a group of my supporters. Now, was that wrong? And let me say that it was wrong. I'm saying,incidentally, that it was wrong, not just illegal, because it isn't a questionof whether it was legal or illegal, that isn't enough. The question is,was it morally wrong? I say that it was morally wrong -- if any of that18,000 dollars went to Senator Nixon, for my personal use. I say that it was morallywrong if it was secretly given and secretly handled. And I say that itwas morally wrong if any of the contributors got special favors for thecontributions that they made. And now to answer those questions let me say this: Not one cent of the18,000 dollars or any other money of that type ever went to me for my personaluse. Every penny of it was used to pay for political expenses that I didnot think should be charged to the taxpayers of the United States.It was not a secret fund. As a matter of fact, when I was on "Meetthe Press" -- some of you may have seen it last Sunday -- Peter Edson cameup to me after the program, and he said, "Dick, what about this "fund" we hearabout?" And I said, "Well, there's no secret about it. Go out and seeDana Smith who was the administrator of the fund." And I gave him [Edson]his [Smith's] address. And I said you will find that the purpose of thefund simply was to defray political expenses that I did not feel shouldbe charged to the Government. And third, let me point out -- and I wantto make this particularly clear -- that no contributor to this fund, nocontributor to any of my campaigns, has ever received any considerationthat he would not have received as an ordinary constituent. I just don't believe in that, and I can say that never, while I havebeen in the Senate of the United States, as far as the people that contributedto this fund are concerned, have I made a telephone call for them to anagency, or have I gone down to an agency in their behalf. And the recordswill show that, the records which are in the hands of the administration. Well, then, some of you will say, and rightly, "Well, what did you use the fund for, Senator?" "Why did you have to have it?" Let me tell you injust a word how a Senate office operates. First of all, a Senator gets15,000 dollars a year in salary. He gets enough money to pay for one trip a year --a round trip, that is -- for himself and his family between his home andWashington, D.C. And then he gets an allowance to handle the people thatwork in his office to handle his mail. And the allowance for my State ofCalifornia is enough to hire 13 people. And let me say, incidentally,that that allowance is not paid to the Senator. It's paid directly tothe individuals that the Senator puts on his pay roll. But all of thesepeople and all of these allowances are for strictly official business;business, for example, when a constituent writes in and wants you to godown to the Veteran's Administration and get some information about hisGI policy -- items of that type, for example. But there are other expenses which are not covered by the Government. AndI think I can best discuss those expenses by asking you some questions. Do you think that when I or any other Senator makes a political speech,has it printed, should charge the printing of that speech and the mailingof that speech to the taxpayers? Do you think, for example, when I or anyother Senator makes a trip to his home State to make a purely politicalspeech that the cost of that trip should be charged to the taxpayers? Doyou think when a Senator makes political broadcasts or political televisionbroadcasts, radio or television, that the expense of those broadcasts shouldbe charged to the taxpayers? Well I know what your answer is. It's thesame answer that audiences give me whenever I discuss this particular problem:The answer is no. The taxpayers shouldn't be required to finance itemswhich are not official business but which are primarily political business. Well, then the question arises, you say, "Well, how do you pay for theseand how can you do it legally?" And there are several ways that it canbe done, incidentally, and that it is done legally in the United States Senateand in the Congress. The first way is to be a rich man. I don't happento be a rich man, so I couldn't use that one. Another way that is usedis to put your wife on the pay roll. Let me say, incidentally, that myopponent, my opposite number for the Vice Presidency on the Democraticticket, does have his wife on the pay roll and has had it -- her on his pay rollfor the ten years -- for the past ten years. Now just let me say this: That's his business, andI'm not critical of him for doing that. You will have to pass judgmenton that particular point. But I have never done that for this reason: I have found that thereare so many deserving stenographers and secretaries in Washington thatneeded the work that I just didn't feel it was right to put my wife onthe pay roll.  My wife's sitting over here. She's a wonderful stenographer.She used to teach stenography and she used to teach shorthand in high school.That was when I met her. And I can tell you folks that she's worked manyhours at night and many hours on Saturdays and Sundays in my office, andshe's done a fine job, and I am proud to say tonight that in the six yearsI've been in the House and the Senate of the United States, Pat Nixonhas never been on the Government pay roll. What are other ways that these finances can be taken care of? Some whoare lawyers, and I happen to be a lawyer, continue to practice law, butI haven't been able to do that. I'm so far away from California that I've been so busy with my senatorial work that I have not engaged in anylegal practice. And, also, as far as law practice is concerned, it seemedto me that the relationship between an attorney and the client was so personalthat you couldn't possibly represent a man as an attorney and then havean unbiased view when he presented his case to you in the event that hehad one before Government. And so I felt that the best way to handle these necessary politicalexpenses of getting my message to the American people and the speechesI made -- the speeches that I had printed for the most part concerned this onemessage of exposing this Administration, the Communism in it, the corruptionin it -- the only way that I could do that was to accept the aid whichpeople in my home State of California, who contributed to my campaign andwho continued to make these contributions after I was elected, were gladto make. And let me say I'm proud of the fact that not one of them has everasked me for a special favor. I'm proud of the fact that not one of themhas ever asked me to vote on a bill other than of my own conscience woulddictate. And I am proud of the fact that the taxpayers, by subterfuge orotherwise, have never paid one dime for expenses which I thought were politicaland shouldn't be charged to the taxpayers. Let me say, incidentally, that some of you may say, "Well, that's allright, Senator, that's your explanation, but have you got any proof?" AndI'd like to tell you this evening that just an hour ago we received anindependent audit of this entire fund. I suggested to Governor ShermanAdams, who is the Chief of Staff of the Dwight Eisenhower campaign, thatan independent audit and legal report be obtained, and I have that audithere in my hands. It's an audit made by the Price Waterhouse & Company firm,and the legal opinion by Gibson, Dunn, & Crutcher, lawyers in Los Angeles,the biggest law firm, and incidentally, one of the best ones in Los Angeles. I am proud to be able to report to you tonight that this audit and this legal opinion is being forwarded to General Eisenhower. And I'd like to read to you the opinion that was prepared by Gibson, Dunn, & Crutcher, and based on all the pertinent laws and statutes, together with the audit report prepared by the certified public accountants. Quote: It is our conclusionthat Senator Nixon did not obtain any financial gain from the collectionand disbursement of the fund by Dana Smith;that Senator Nixon did not violate any federal or state law by reason ofthe operation of the fund; and that neitherthe portion of the fund paid by Dana Smith directly to third persons, northe portion paid to Senator Nixon, to reimburse himfor designated office expenses, constituted income to the Senator whichwas either reportable or taxable as income under applicabletax laws.  (signed)  Gibson, Dunn,& Crutcher,  by Elmo H. Conley Now that, my friends, is not Nixon speaking, but that's an independentaudit which was requested, because I want the American people to know allthe facts, and I am not afraid of having independent people go in and check the facts, and that is exactly what they did. But then I realized that there are still some who may say, and rightfully so -- and let me say that I recognize that some will continueto smear regardless of what the truth may be -- but that there has been,understandably, some honest misunderstanding on this matter, and thereare some that will say, "Well, maybe you were able, Senator, to fake thisthing. How can we believe what you say? After all, is there a possibilitythat maybe you got some sums in cash? Is there a possibility that you mayhave feathered your own nest?" And so now, what I am going to do -- andincidentally this is unprecedented in the history of American politics-- I am going at this time to give to this television and radio audio -- audience,a complete financial history, everything I've earned, everything I've spent,everything I own. And I want you to know the facts. I'll have to start early. I was born in 1913. Our family was one ofmodest circumstances, and most of my early life was spent in a store outin East Whittier. It was a grocery store, one of those family enterprises.The only reason we were able to make it go was because my mother and dadhad five boys, and we all worked in the store. I worked my way throughcollege, and, to a great extent, through law school. And then in 1940,probably the best thing that ever happened to me happened. I married Patwho's sitting over here. We had a rather difficult time after we weremarried, like so many of the young couples who may be listening to us.I practiced law. She continued to teach school. Then, in 1942, I went into the service. Let me say that my service recordwas not a particularly unusual one. I went to the South Pacific. I guessI'm entitled to a couple of battle stars. I got a couple of letters ofcommendation. But I was just there when the bombs were falling. And thenI returned -- returned to the United States, and in 1946, I ran for theCongress. When we came out of the war -- Pat and I -- Pat during the warhad worked as a stenographer, and in a bank, and as an economist for aGovernment agency -- and when we came out, the total of our savings, fromboth my law practice, her teaching and all the time that I was in the war, thetotal for that entire period was just a little less than 10,000 dollars. Everycent of that, incidentally, was in Government bonds. Well that's wherewe start, when I go into politics. Now, what have I earned since I went into politics? Well, here it is.I've jotted it down. Let me read the notes. First of all, I've had mysalary as a Congressman and as a Senator. Second, I have received a totalin this past six years of 1600 dollars from estates which were in my law firmat the time that I severed my connection with it. And, incidentally, asI said before, I have not engaged in any legal practice and have not acceptedany fees from business that came into the firm after I went into politics.I have made an average of approximately 1500 dollars a year from nonpoliticalspeaking engagements and lectures. And then, fortunately, we've inherited a little money. Pat sold herinterest in her father's estate for 3,000 dollars, and I inherited 1500 dollars frommy grandfather. We lived rather modestly. For four years we lived in anapartment in Parkfairfax, in Alexandria, Virginia. The rent was 80 dollars amonth. And we saved for the time that we could buy a house. Now, that waswhat we took in. What did we do with this money? What do we have todayto show for it? This will surprise you because it is so little, I suppose,as standards generally go of people in public life. First of all, we've got a house in Washington, which cost 41,000 dollars andon which we owe 20,000 dollars. We have a house in Whittier, California whichcost 13,000 dollars and on which we owe 3000 dollars. My folks are living there at thepresent time. I have just 4000 dollars in life insurance, plus my GI policy whichI've never been able to convert, and which will run out in two years. Ihave no life insurance whatever on Pat. I have no life insurance on ourtwo youngsters, Tricia and Julie. I own a 1950 Oldsmobile car. We have ourfurniture. We have no stocks and bonds of any type. We have no interestof any kind, direct or indirect, in any business. Now, that's what we have.What do we owe? Well in addition to the mortgage, the 20,000 dollar mortgage on the housein Washington, the 10,000 dollar one on the house in Whittier, I owe 4500 dollars tothe Riggs Bank in Washington, D.C., with interest 4 and 1/2 percent. Iowe 3500 dollars to my parents, and the interest on that loan, which I pay regularly,because it's the part of the savings they made through the years they wereworking so hard -- I pay regularly 4 percent interest. And then I havea 500 dollar loan, which I have on my life insurance. Well, that's about it. That's what we have. And that's what we owe.It isn't very much. But Pat and I have the satisfaction that every dimethat we've got is honestly ours. I should say this, that Pat doesn't havea mink coat. But she does have a respectable Republican cloth coat, andI always tell her she'd look good in anything. One other thing I probably should tell you, because if I don't they'llprobably be saying this about me, too. We did get something, a gift, afterthe election. A man down in Texas heard Pat on the radio mention the factthat our two youngsters would like to have a dog. And believe it or not,the day before we left on this campaign trip we got a message from UnionStation in Baltimore, saying they had a package for us. We went down toget it. You know what it was? It was a little cocker spaniel dog in acrate that he'd sent all the way from Texas, black and white, spotted. And our little girl Tricia, the six year old, named it "Checkers." And you know, the kids, like all kids, love the dog, and I just wantto say this, right now, that regardless of what they say about it, we'regonna keep it. It isn't easy to come before a nationwide audience and bare your life,as I've done. But I want to say some things before I conclude that I thinkmost of you will agree on. Mr. Mitchell, the Chairman of the DemocraticNational Committee, made this statement -- that if a man couldn't afford tobe in the United States Senate, he shouldn't run for the Senate. And Ijust want to make my position clear. I don't agree with Mr. Mitchell whenhe says that only a rich man should serve his Government in the UnitedStates Senate or in the Congress. I don't believe that represents the thinkingof the Democratic Party, and I know that it doesn't represent the thinkingof the Republican Party. I believe that it's fine that a man like Governor Stevenson, who inheriteda fortune from his father, can run for President. But I also feel thatit's essential in this country of ours that a man of modest means can alsorun for President, because, you know, remember Abraham Lincoln, you rememberwhat he said: "God must have loved the common people -- he made so manyof them." And now I'm going to suggest some courses of conduct. First of all,you have read in the papers about other funds, now. Mr. Stevenson apparentlyhad a couple -- one of them in which a group of business people paid andhelped to supplement the salaries of State employees. Here is where themoney went directly into their pockets, and I think that what Mr. Stevensonshould do should be to come before the American people, as I have, givethe names of the people that contributed to that fund, give the names ofthe people who put this money into their pockets at the same time thatthey were receiving money from their State government and see what favors,if any, they gave out for that. I don't condemn Mr. Stevenson for what he did, but until the facts arein there is a doubt that will be raised. And as far as Mr. Sparkman isconcerned, I would suggest the same thing. He's had his wife on the payroll. I don't condemn him for that, but I think that he should come beforethe American people and indicate what outside sources of income he hashad. I would suggest that under the circumstances both Mr. Sparkman andMr. Stevenson should come before theAmerican people, as I have, and make a complete financial statement asto their financial history, and if they don't it will be an admission thatthey have something to hide. And I think you will agree with me -- because,folks, remember, a man that's to be President of the United States, a manthat's to be Vice President of the United States, must have the confidenceof all the people. And that's why I'm doing what I'm doing. And that'swhy I suggest that Mr. Stevenson and Mr. Sparkman, since they are underattack, should do what they're doing. Now let me say this: I know that this is not the last of the smears.In spite of my explanation tonight, other smears will be made. Others havebeen made in the past. And the purpose of the smears, I know, is this:to silence me; to make me let up. Well, they just don't know who they'redealing with. I'm going to tell you this: I remember in the dark days ofthe Hiss case some of the same columnists, some of the same radio commentatorswho are attacking me now and misrepresenting my position, were violently opposing me at the time I was after AlgerHiss. But I continued to fight because I knew I was right, and I can sayto this great television and radio audience that I have no apologies tothe American people for my part in putting Alger Hiss where he is today.And as far as this is concerned, I intend to continue to fight. Why do I feel so deeply? Why do I feel that in spite of the smears,the misunderstanding, the necessity for a man to come up here and barehis soul as I have -- why is it necessary for me to continue this fight?And I want to tell you why. Because, you see, I love my country. And Ithink my country is in danger. And I think the only man that can save Americaat this time is the man that's running for President, on my ticket -- DwightEisenhower. You say, "Why do I think it is in danger?" And I say, lookat the record. Seven years of the Truman-Acheson Administration, and what'shappened? Six hundred million people lost to the Communists. And a war in Koreain which we have lost 117,000 American casualties, and I say to all ofyou that a policy that results in the loss of 600 million people to theCommunists, and a war which cost us 117,000 American casualties isn't goodenough for America. And I say that those in the State Departmentthat made the mistakes which caused that war and which resulted in thoselosses should be kicked out of the State Department just as fast as weget them out of there. And let me say that I know Mr. Stevenson won't do that because he defendsthe Truman policy, and I know that Dwight Eisenhower will do that, andthat he will give America the leadership that it needs. Take the problemof corruption. You've read about the mess in Washington. Mr. Stevensoncan't clean it up because he was picked by the man, Truman, under whose Administration the messwas made. You wouldn't trust the man who made the mess to clean it up. That'sTruman. And by the same token you can't trust the man who was picked bythe man that made the mess to clean it up -- and that's Stevenson. And so Isay, Eisenhower, who owed nothing to Truman, nothing to the big city bosses-- he is the man that can clean up the mess in Washington. Take Communism.I say that as far as that subject is concerned the danger is great to America.In the Hiss case they got the secrets which enabled them to break the Americansecret State Department code. They got secrets in the atomic bomb casewhich enabled them to get the secret of the atomic bomb five years beforethey would have gotten it by their own devices. And I say that any manwho called the Alger Hiss case a red herring isn't fit to be Presidentof the United States. I say that a man who, like Mr. Stevenson, has pooh-poohed and ridiculedthe Communist threat in the United States -- he said that they are phantomsamong ourselves. He has accused us that have attempted to expose the Communists,of looking for Communists in the Bureau of Fisheries and Wildlife. I saythat a man who says that isn't qualified to be President of theUnited States. And I say that the only man who can lead us in this fightto rid the Government of both those who are Communists and those who havecorrupted this Government is Eisenhower, because Eisenhower, you can besure, recognizes the problem, and he knows how to deal with it. Now let me that finally, this evening, I want to read to you, just briefly, excerpts from a letter which I received, a letter which after all this is over no one can take away from us. It reads as follows: Dear SenatorNixon,  Since I amonly 19 years of age, I can't vote in this presidential election, but believeme if I could you and General Eisenhowerwould certainly get my vote. My husband is in the Fleet Marines in Korea.He' a corpsman on the front lines and we have a two month old son he's never seen. And I feel confident that with great Americanslike you and General Eisenhower in the White House, lonely Americans like myself will be united with their loved ones now in Korea. I only pray to God that you won't be too late. Enclosed is a small check to help you in your campaign. Living on $85 a month, it is all I can afford at present, but let me know what else I can do. Folks, it's a check for 10 dollars, and it's one that I will never cash. Andjust let me say this: We hear a lot about prosperity these days, but Isay why can't we have prosperity built on peace, rather than prosperitybuilt on war? Why can't we have prosperity and an honest Government inWashington, D.C., at the same time? Believe me, we can. And Eisenhoweris the man that can lead this crusade to bring us that kind of prosperity. And now, finally, I know that you wonder whether or not I am going tostay on the Republican ticket or resign. Let me say this: I don't believethat I ought to quit, because I am not a quitter. And, incidentally, Pat'snot a quitter. After all, her name was Patricia Ryan and she was born onSt. Patrick's day, and you know the Irish never quit.  But the decision,my friends, is not mine. I would do nothing that would harm the possibilitiesof Dwight Eisenhower to become President of the United States. And forthat reason I am submitting to the Republican National Committee tonightthrough this television broadcast the decision which it is theirs to make.Let them decide whether my position on the ticket will help or hurt. AndI am going to ask you to help them decide. Wire and write the RepublicanNational Committee whether you think I should stay on or whether I shouldget off. And whatever their decision is, I will abide by it. But just let me say this last word: Regardless of what happens, I'mgoing to continue this fight. I'm going to campaign up and down in Americauntil we drive the crooks and the Communists and those that defend themout of Washington. And remember folks, Eisenhower is a great man, believeme. He's a great man. And a vote for Eisenhower is a vote for what's goodfor America. And what's good for America....  See Also: Richard M. Nixon: Cambodian Incursion Address Audio Source: Linked directly to:http://millercenter.org/scripps Copyright Status:Text believed to be in the public domain. Permissions Request Greg CummingNixon Library and Birthplace18001 Yorba Linda Blvd.Yorba Linda, CA 92886Phone: 714.993.5075 E-mail:greg@nixonlibrary.org