[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio.] Ladies and Gentlemen, I'd planned to speakto you tonight to report on the state of the Union, but the events of earlier today have led me to change thoseplans. Today is a day for mourning and remembering. Nancy and I are pained to the core bythe tragedy of the shuttle Challenger. We know we share this pain with all of the peopleof our country. This is truly a national loss. Nineteen years ago, almost to the day, we lost three astronauts in aterrible accident on the ground. But we've never lost an astronaut in flight. We've neverhad a tragedy like this. And perhaps we've forgotten the courage it took for the crew ofthe shuttle. But they, the Challenger Seven, were aware of the dangers, but overcame themand did their jobs brilliantly. We mourn seven heroes: Michael Smith, Dick Scobee, Judith Resnik, Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, Gregory Jarvis, and Christa McAuliffe. We mourntheir loss as a nation together. For the families of the seven, we cannot bear, as you do, the fullimpact of this tragedy. But we feel the loss, and we're thinking about you so very much.Your loved ones were daring and brave, and they had that special grace, that specialspirit that says, "Give me a challenge, and I'll meet it with joy." They had ahunger to explore the universe and discover its truths. They wished to serve, and theydid. They served all of us. We've grown used to wonders in this century. It's hard to dazzle us.But for twenty-five years the United States space program has been doing just that. We'vegrown used to the idea of space, and, perhaps we forget that we've only just begun. We'restill pioneers. They, the members of the Challenger crew, were pioneers. And I want to say something to the schoolchildren of America whowere watching the live coverage of the shuttle's take-off. I know it's hard tounderstand, but sometimes painful things like this happen. It's all part of the process ofexploration and discovery. It's all part of taking a chance and expanding man's horizons.The future doesn't belong to the fainthearted; it belongs to the brave. The Challengercrew was pulling us into the future, and we'll continue to follow them. I've always had great faith in and respect for our space program. And what happened today does nothing to diminish it. We don't hide our space program. We don't keep secrets and cover things up. We do it all up front and in public. That's the way freedom is, and we wouldn't change it for a minute.  We'll continue our quest in space. There will be more shuttle flights and more shuttle crews and, yes, more volunteers, more civilians, more teachers in space. Nothing ends here; our hopes and our journeys continue. I want to add that I wish I could talk to every man and woman whoworks for NASA, or who worked on this mission and tell them: "Your dedication andprofessionalism have moved and impressed us for decades. And we know of your anguish. Weshare it." There's a coincidence today. On this day three hundred and ninety years ago, the greatexplorer Sir Francis Drake died aboard ship off the coast of Panama. In his lifetime thegreat frontiers were the oceans, and a historian later said, "He lived by the sea,died on it, and was buried in it." Well, today, we can say of the Challenger crew:Their dedication was, like Drake's, complete. The crew of the space shuttle Challenger honored us by the manner inwhich they lived their lives. We will never forget them, nor the last time we saw them,this morning, as they prepared for their journey and waved goodbye and "slipped thesurly bonds of earth" to "touch the face of God." Thank you. George W. Bush: "Columbia" Disaster Address  See Also:Off-site audio clip explaining cause of Shuttle Challenger disaster Audio and Images #1 and #3 (Screenshots) Source:The Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation & Library U.S. Copyright Status: 