[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly from audio] My fellow citizens:  I have requested this opportunity to talk to the people ofMassachusetts about the tragedy which happened last Friday evening. This morning I entereda plea of guilty to the charge of leaving the scene of an accident. Prior to my appearancein court it would have been improper for me to comment on these matters. But tonight I amfree to tell you what happened and to say what it means to me. On the weekend of July 18th, I was on Martha's Vineyard Islandparticipating with my nephew, Joe Kennedy -- as for thirty years my family hasparticipated -- in the annual Edgartown Sailing Regatta. Only reasons of health preventedmy wife from accompanying me. On Chappaquiddick Island, off Martha's Vineyard, I attended, onFriday evening, July 18th, a cook-out I had encouraged and helped sponsor for a devoted groupof Kennedy campaign secretaries. When I left the party, around 11:15pm, I wasaccompanied by one of these girls, MissMary Jo Kopechne. Mary Jo was one of the mostdevoted members of the staff of Senator Robert Kennedy. She worked for him for four yearsand was broken up over his death. For this reason, and because she was such a gentle,kind, and idealistic person, all of us tried to help her feel that she still had a homewith the Kennedy family.   Mary Jo Kopechne There is no truth, no truth whatever, to the widely circulatedsuspicions of immoral conduct that have been leveled at my behavior and hers regardingthat evening. There has never been a private relationship between us of any kind. I knowof nothing in Mary Jo's conduct on that or any other occasion -- and the same is true of theother girls at that party -- that would lend any substance to such ugly speculation abouttheir character. Nor was I driving under the influence of liquor. Little over one mile away, the car that I was driving on an unlitroad went off a narrow bridge which had no guard rails and was built on a left angle to theroad. The car overturned in a deep pond and immediately filled with water. I rememberthinking as the cold water rushed in around my head that I was for certain drowning. Thenwater entered my lungs and I actual felt the sensation of drowning. But somehow Istruggled to the surface alive. I made immediate and repeated efforts to save Mary Jo by diving intothe strong and murky current, but succeeded only in increasing my state of utter exhaustionand alarm. My conduct and conversations during the next several hours, to the extent thatI can remember them, make no sense to me at all. Although my doctors informed me that I suffered a cerebralconcussion, as well as shock, I do not seek to escape responsibility for my actions byplacing the blame either on the physical and emotional trauma brought on by the accident, oron anyone else. I regard as indefensible the fact that I did not report the accident tothe police immediately. Instead of looking directly for a telephone after lying exhausted inthe grass for an undetermined time, I walked back to the cottage where the party was beingheld and requested the help of two friends, my cousin, Joseph Gargan and Phil Markham, anddirected them to return immediately to the scene with me -- this was sometime aftermidnight -- in order to undertake a new effort to dive down and locate Miss Kopechne.Their strenuous efforts, undertaken at some risk to their own lives, also proved futile. All kinds of scrambled thoughts -- all of them confused, some ofthem irrational, many of them which I cannot recall, and some of which I would not haveseriously entertained under normal circumstances -- went through my mind during thisperiod. They were reflected in the various inexplicable, inconsistent, and inconclusivethings I said and did, including such questions as whether the girl might still be alivesomewhere out of that immediate area, whether some awful curse did actually hang over allthe Kennedys, whether there was some justifiable reason for me to doubt what had happenedand to delay my report, whether somehow the awful weight of this incredible incidentmight in some way pass from my shoulders. I was overcome, I'm frank to say, by a jumbleof emotions: grief, fear, doubt, exhaustion, panic, confusion, and shock. Instructing Gargan and Markham not to alarm Mary Jo's friends thatnight, I had them take me to the ferry crossing. The ferry having shut down for the night,I suddenly jumped into the water and impulsively swam across, nearly drowning once againin the effort, and returned to my hotel about 2:00am -- and collapsed in my room. I remember going out at one point and saying something to the roomclerk. In the morning, with my mind somewhat more lucid, I made an effortto call a family legal advisor, Burke Marshall, from a public telephone on theChappaquiddick side of the ferry and then belatedly reported the accident to the Martha['s]Vineyard police. Today, as I mentioned, I felt morally obligated to plead guilty tothe charge of leaving the scene of an accident. No words on my part can possibly expressthe terrible pain and suffering I feel over this tragic incident. This last week has beenan agonizing one for me and for the members of my family. And the grief we feel over the lossof a wonderful friend will remain with us the rest of our lives. These events, the publicity, innuendo, and whispers which havesurrounded them and my admission of guilt this morning raises the question in my mind ofwhether my standing among the people of my State has been so impaired that I should resignmy seat in the United States Senate. If at any time the citizens of Massachusetts shouldlack confidence in their Senator's character, or his ability -- with or withoutjustification -- he could not in my opinion adequately perform his duties and should notcontinue in office. The people of this State, the State which sent John Quincy Adams,and Daniel Webster, and Charles Sumner, and Henry Cabot Lodge, and John Kennedy to theUnited States Senate are entitled to representation in that body by men who inspire theirutmost confidence. For this reason, I would understand full well why some might think itright for me to resign. For me, this will be a difficult decision to make. It has been seven years since my first election to the Senate. Youand I share many memories -- some of them have been glorious, some have been very sad. Theopportunity to work with you and serve Massachusetts has made my life worthwhile. And so I ask you tonight, the people of Massachusetts, to think thisthrough with me. In facing this decision, I seek your advice and opinion. In making it, Iseek your prayers -- for this is a decision that I will have finally to make on my own. It has been written: A man does what he must -- in spite of personalconsequences, in spite of obstacles, and dangers, and pressures -- and that is the basis ofall human morality.1 ...whatever may be the sacrifices he faces, if he follows his conscience --the loss of his friends, his fortune, his contentment, even the esteem of his fellow man-- each man must decide for himself the course he will follow. The stories of the pastcourage cannot supply courage itself. For this, each man must look into his own soul. I pray that I can have the courage to make the right decision.Whatever is decided, whatever the future holds for me, I hope that I shall have -- beable to put this most recent tragedy behind me and make some further contribution to ourstate and mankind -- whether it be in public or private life. Thank you and good night.  1 2  Copyright Status: Text and Audio = Uncertain.