[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below   transcribed directly from audio] Hello! Hello, everybody!   Thank you so much. Thank you.Thank you very much. Everybody, please   have a seat. Thank you very much. Thank you. Let me just begin by   making a few acknowledgements. First of all, I've got some outstanding   fathers here in the first row who arent seeing their kids enough   because I'm working them all the time -- three members of my Cabinet:   Secretary of the Treasury Tim Geithner -- Attorney General Eric Holder   -- and Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke are here. In addition, we've got one   of my heroes and I'm sure one of yours, somebody whose shoulders I stand   on and allowed me to become President of the United States, and that's   Congressman from the great state of Georgia, John Lewis, is here. A   fierce advocate on behalf of the District of Columbia, Congresswoman   Eleanor Holmes Norton is here. I want to acknowledge the   Mayor of Washington, D.C., Adrian Fenty in the house. The executive   director of ARC, Edmund Fleet, is here. I want to thank all the panel   discussion participants who are involved in todays events, and I want   to thank Nurney Mason -- a Washington, D.C. icon. Nurney founded   Masons Barbershop in 1961. That's the year I was born. Its still   going strong. He is here with his children and his grandchildren.   Where is he? There he is right there. I could use a little trim. One year ago this week, we   kicked off a national conversation on fatherhood and personal   responsibility, and members of our administration fanned out all across   the country to hear from fathers and families about the challenges that   they face. Secretary Arne Duncan, our Secretary of Education, held a   discussion in New Hampshire about the link between fatherhood and   educational achievement. Gary Locke talked to fathers in California   about balancing the needs of their families with the demands of their   jobs. Secretary Shinseki, of Veterans Affairs, held a town hall for   military and veteran dads in North Carolina. And Attorney General   Holder traveled to Georgia for a forum about fathers in our criminal   justice system. And in each of these places,   each of these leaders posed a simple question: How can we as a nation   -- not just the government, but businesses and community groups and   concerned citizens -- how can we all come together to help fathers meet   their responsibilities to our families and communities? And we did this because we   know the vital role fathers play in the lives of our children. Fathers   are our first teachers and coaches -- or in my house, assistant teachers   and assistant coaches -- to mom. But theyre our mentors,   our role models. They show us by the example they set the kind of   people they want us to become. But we also know that what   too many fathers being absent means -- too many fathers missing from too   many homes, missing from too many lives. We know that when fathers   abandon their responsibilities, theres harm done to those kids. We   know that children who grow up without a father are more likely to live   in poverty. They're more likely to drop out of school. They're more   likely to wind up in prison. Theyre more likely to abuse drugs and   alcohol. Theyre more likely to run away from home. Theyre more   likely to become teenage parents themselves. And I say all this as   someone who grew up without a father in my own life. He left my family   when I was two years old. And while I was lucky to have a wonderful   mother and loving grandparents who poured everything they had into me   and my sister, I still felt the weight of that absence. Its something   that leaves a hole in a childs life that no government can fill. So we can talk all we want   here in Washington about issues like education and health care and   crime; we can build good schools; we can put money into creating good   jobs; we can do everything we can to keep our streets safe -- but   government cant keep our kids from looking for trouble on those   streets. Government cant force a kid to pick up a book or make sure   that the homework gets done. Government cant be there day in, day out,   to provide discipline and guidance and the love that it takes to raise a   child. Thats our job as fathers, as mothers, as guardians for our   children. The fact is, its easy to   become a father, technically -- any guy can do that. Its hard to live   up to the lifelong responsibilities that come with fatherhood. And its   a challenge even in good times, when our families are doing well. Its   especially difficult when times are tough, families are straining just   to keep everything together. In a time of war, many of   our military families are stretched thin, with fathers doing multiple   tours of duty far away from their children. In difficult economic   times, a lot of fathers are worried about whether theyre going to be   able to keep their job, or find a job, or whether theyll be able to pay   the bills and give their children the kinds of opportunities that if   they didnt have them themselves, at least they wished for their   children. And there are a lot of men who are out of work and wrestling   with the shame and frustration that comes when you feel like you cant   be the kind of provider you want to be for the people that you love. But heres the key message I   think all of us want to send today to fathers all across the country:   Our children dont need us to be superheroes. They dont need us to be   perfect. They do need us to be present. They need us to show up and   give it our best shot, no matter what else is going on in our lives.   They need us to show them -- not just with words, but with deeds -- that   they, those kids, are always our first priority. Those family meals,   afternoons in the park, bedtime stories; the encouragement we give, the   questions we answer, the limits we set, the example we set of   persistence in the face of difficulty and hardship -- those things add   up over time, and they shape a childs character, build their core,   teach them to trust in life and to enter into it with confidence and   with hope and with determination. And thats something theyll always   carry with them: that love that we show not with money, or fame, or   spectacular feats, but through small daily acts -- the love we show and   that we earn by being present in the lives of our children. Now, unfortunately, the way   we talk about fatherhood in this country doesnt always reinforce these   truths. When we talk about issues like child care and work-family   balance, we call them womens issues and mothers issues. Too often   when we talk about fatherhood and personal responsibility, we talk about   it in political terms, in terms of left and right, conservative/liberal,   instead of whats right and whats wrong. And when we do that, weve   gotten off track. So I think its time for a new conversation around   fatherhood in this country. We can all agree that weve   got too many mothers out there forced to do everything all by   themselves. Theyre doing a heroic job, often under trying   circumstances. They deserve a lot of credit for that. But they   shouldnt have to do it alone. The work of raising our children is the   most important job in this country, and its all of our responsibilities   -- mothers and fathers. Now, I cant legislate   fatherhood -- I cant force anybody to love a child. But what we can do   is send a clear message to our fathers that there is no excuse for   failing to meet their obligations. What we can do is make it easier for   fathers who make responsible choices and harder for those who avoid   those choices. What we can do is come together and support fathers who   are willing to step up and be good partners and parents and providers. And thats why today were   launching the next phase of our work to promote responsible fatherhood   -- a new, nationwide Fatherhood and Mentoring Initiative. This is a   call to action with cities and states, with individuals and   organizations across the country -- from the NFL Players Association to   the National PTA, to everyday moms and dads -- were raising awareness   about responsible fatherhood and working to re-engage absent fathers   with their families. As part of this effort,   weve proposed a new and expanded Fatherhood, Marriage and Families   Innovation Fund. And we plan to seek out and support the very best,   most successful initiatives in our states and communities -- those that   are offering services like job training, or parenting skills classes,   domestic violence prevention -- all which help provide the kind of   network of support for men, particularly those in vulnerable   communities. Were also going to help   dads who get caught up -- we want to make sure that they're caught up on   child support payments and that we re-engage them in their childrens   lives. Were going to support efforts to build healthy relationships   between parents as well -- because we know that children benefit not   just from loving mothers and loving fathers, but from strong and loving   marriages as well. Were also launching a new   transitional jobs initiative for ex-offenders and low-income,   non-custodial fathers -- because these are men who often face serious   barriers to finding work and keeping work. Well help them develop the   skills and experience they need to move into full-time, long-term   employment, so they can meet their child support obligations and help   provide for their families. And under Eric Holders   direction, our Justice Department is planning to create its first   Fathering Re-Entry Court for ex-offender dads -- and to help replicate   this program in courts across the country. The idea here is very   simple: to reach fathers right as theyre leaving the criminal justice   system and connect them immediately to the employment and services they   need to start making their child support payments and reconnecting them   with their families. This program was inspired by   leaders like Peter Spokes, who was the executive director of the   National Center for Fathering -- a good friend to many in our   administration, all of whom were deeply saddened by his recent passing.   And we are honored to have Peters wife, Barbara, with us here today.   Wheres Barbara? I just saw her earlier. There she is. Thank you. So these initiatives are a   good start. But ultimately, we know that the decision to be a good   father -- thats up to us, each of us, as individuals. Its one that   men across this country are making every single day -- attending those   school assemblies; parent-teacher conferences; coaching soccer, Little   League; scrimping and saving, and working that extra shift so that their   children can go to college. And plenty of fathers -- and men who arent   fathers as well -- are stepping up to serve as mentors and tutors and   big brothers and foster parents to young people who dont have any   responsible adult in their lives. Even when we give it our   best efforts, there will still be plenty of days of struggle and   heartache when we dont quite measure up -- talking to the men here   now. Even with all the good fortune and support Michelle and I have had   in our lives, Ive made plenty of mistakes as a parent. Ive lost count   of all the times when the demands of work have taken me from the duties   of fatherhood. And I know Ive missed out on moments in my daughters   lives that Ill never get back, and thats a loss thats hard to   accept. But I also know the feeling   that one author described when she wrote that to have a childis to   decide forever to have your heart go walking around outside your body.   Think about that -- to have a child is to have your heart walking around   outside your body. Im sure a lot of fathers   here know that same memory that I have, of driving home with Michelle   and Malia right after she was born, going about 10 miles an hour. Your   emotions swinging between unadulterated joy and sheer terror. And I   made a pledge that day that I would do everything I could to give my   daughter what I never had -- that if I could be anything in life, I   would be a good father. And like a lot of the men   here, since that time Ive found theres nothing else in my life that   compares to the pleasures I take in spending time with my girls.   Nothing else comes close to the pride I feel in their achievement and   the satisfaction I get in watching them grow into strong, confident   young women. Over the course of my life,   I have been an attorney, Ive been a professor, Ive been a state   senator, Ive been a U.S. senator -- and I currently am serving as   President of the United States. But I can say without hesitation that   the most challenging, most fulfilling, most important job I will have   during my time on this Earth is to be Sasha and Malias dad. So you dont need a fancy   degree for that. You dont need a lot of money for that. No matter   what doubts we may feel, what difficulties we may face, we all have to   remember being a father -- its not just an obligation and a   responsibility; it is a privilege and a blessing, one that we all have   to embrace as individuals and as a nation. So, Happy Fathers Day,   everybody. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.    Text & Audio Source:    Copyright Status: Text and Audio = Public domain. Copyright Status: Text and Audio = Public domain.