[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below     transcribed directly from audio]  COBRA Recovery Act When we renew the     Elementary and Secondary Education Act,     we will work with Congress to expand these reforms to all 50 states.     Still, in this economy, a high school diploma no longer guarantees a     good job.That's why I urge the Senate to follow the House and pass a     bill that will revitalize our community colleges, which are a career     pathway to the children of so many working families. To make college more     affordable, this bill will finally end the unwarranted taxpayer     subsidies that go to banks for student loans.Instead, let's take that     money and give families a 10,000 dollar tax credit for four years of     college and increase Pell Grants.And let's tell another one million     students that when they graduate, they will be required to pay only 10     percent of their income on student loans, and all of their debt will be     forgiven after 20 years -- and forgiven after 10 years if they choose a     career in public service, because in the United States of America, no     one should go broke because they chose to go to college. And by the way, it's time     for colleges and universities to get serious about cutting their own     costs -- because they, too, have a responsibility to help solve this     problem.     Now, the     price of college tuition is just one of the burdens facing the     middle-class. That's why last year I asked Vice President Biden to chair     a  task force on Middle-Class Families. That's why we're nearly doubling     the child care tax credit, and making it easier to save for retirement     by giving access to every worker a retirement account and expanding the     tax credit for those who start a nest egg. That's why we're working to     lift the value of a family's single largest investment -- their home. The     steps we took last year to shore up the housing market have allowed     millions of Americans to take out new loans and save an average of     1500 dollars on mortgage payments. This year, we will step up re-financing so     that homeowners can move into more affordable mortgages. And -- And it is     precisely to relieve the burden on middle-class families that we still     need health insurance reform. Yes, we do. Now, let's clear a few     things up. I didn't choose to tackle this issue to get some legislative     victory under my belt.And by now it should be fairly obvious that I     didn't take on health care because it was good politics.I took on     health care because [of] the stories I've heard from Americans with     preexisting conditions whose lives depend on getting coverage; patients     who've been denied coverage; families -- even those with insurance --     who are just one illness away from financial ruin. After nearly a century of     trying -- Democratic Administrations, Republican Administrations -- we     are closer than ever to bringing more security to the lives of so many     Americans.The approach we've taken would protect every American from     the worst practices of the insurance industry.It would give small     businesses and uninsured Americans a chance to choose an affordable     health care plan in a competitive market.It would require every     insurance plan to cover preventive care.And by the way, I want to     acknowledge our First Lady, Michelle Obama, who this year is creating a     national movement to tackle the epidemic of childhood obesity and make     kids healthier. Thank you.She gets embarrassed. Our approach would preserve     the right of Americans who have insurance to keep their doctor and their     plan.It would reduce costs and premiums for millions of families and     businesses.And according to the  Congressional Budget Office -- the     independent organization that both parties have cited as the official     scorekeeper for Congress -- our approach would bring down the deficit by     as much as one trillion dollars over the next two decades. Still, this is a complexed     issue, and the longer it was debated, the more skeptical people became.     I take my share of the blame for not explaining it more clearly to the     American people.And I know that with all the lobbying and     horse-trading, the process left most Americans wondering, "What's in it     for me?" But I also know this problem     is not going away. By the time I'm finished speaking tonight, more     Americans will have lost their health insurance.Millions will lose it     this year.Our deficit will grow.Premiums will go up.Patients will be     denied the care they need.Small business owners will continue to drop     coverage altogether.I will not walk away from these Americans, and     neither should the people in this chamber. So, as temperatures cool, I     want everyone to take another look at the plan we've proposed. There's     a reason why many doctors, nurses, and health care experts who know our     system best consider this approach a vast improvement over the status     quo.But if anyone from either party has a better approach that will     bring down premiums, bring down the deficit, cover the uninsured,     strengthen Medicare for seniors, and stop insurance company abuses, let     me know.Let me know.Let me know.I'm eager to see it. Here's what I ask Congress,     though:Don't walk away from reform.Not now.Not when we are so     close.Let us find a way to come together and finish the job for the     American people.Let's get it done.Let's get it done. Now, even as health care     reform would reduce our deficit, it's not enough to dig us out of a     massive fiscal hole in which we find ourselves.It's a challenge that     makes all others that much harder to solve, and one that's been subject     to a lot of political posturing.So let me start the discussion of     government spending by setting the record straight. At the beginning of the last     decade, the year 2000, America had a budget surplus of over 200     billion dollars.By -- By the time I took office, we had a one-year deficit of over     one     trillion dollars and projected deficits of eight trillion dollars over the next     decade.Most of this was the result of not paying for two wars, two tax     cuts, and an expensive prescription drug program. On top of that, the     effects of the recession put a three trillion dollar hole in our budget. All this     was before I walked in the door. Now -- Now -- just stating the     facts.Now, if we had taken office in ordinary times, I would have liked     nothing more than to start bringing down the deficit.But we took office     amid a crisis. And our efforts to prevent a second depression have added     another one trillion dollars to our national debt.That, too, is a fact. I'm absolutely convinced     that was the right thing to do. But families across the country are     tightening their belts and making tough decisions.The federal     government should do the same. So tonight, I'm proposing specific steps     to pay for the trillion dollars that it took to rescue the economy last     year. Starting in 2011, we are     prepared to freeze government spending for three years. Spending related     to our national security, Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security will     not be affected. But all other discretionary government programs will.     Like any cash-strapped family, we will work within a budget to invest in     what we need and sacrifice what we don't.And if I have to enforce this     discipline by veto, I will. We will continue to go     through the budget, line by line, page by page, to eliminate programs     that we can't afford and don't work.We've already identified 20     billion dollars in savings for next year. To help working families, we'll extend     our middle-class tax cuts.But at a time of record deficits, we will not     continue tax cuts for oil companies, for investment fund managers, and     for those making over 250,000 dollars a year.We just can't afford it. Now, even after paying for     what we spent on my watch, we'll still face the massive deficit we had     when I took office.More importantly, the cost of Medicare, Medicaid,     and Social Security will continue to skyrocket.That's why I've called     for a bipartisan fiscal commission, modeled on a proposal by Republican     Judd Gregg and Democrat      Kent Conrad.This can't be one of those     Washington gimmicks that lets us pretend we solved a problem.The     commission will have to provide a specific set of solutions by a certain     deadline. Now, yesterday the      Senate     blocked a bill that would have created this commission.So I'll issue an     executive order that will allow us to go forward, because I refuse to     pass this problem on to another generation of Americans.And when the     vote comes tomorrow, the Senate should restore the     pay-as-you-go law     that was a big reason for why we had record surpluses in the 1990s. Now, I know that some in my     own party will argue that we can't address the deficit or freeze     government spending when so many are still hurting.And I agree -- which     is why this freeze won't take effect until next year -- when the economy     is stronger.That's how budgeting works.But understand -- understand     if we don't take meaningful steps to rein in our debt, it could damage     our markets, increase the cost of borrowing, and jeopardize our recovery     -- all of which would have an even worse effect on our job growth and     family incomes. From some on the right, I     expect we'll hear a different argument -- that if we just make fewer     investments in our people, extend tax cuts including those for the     wealthier Americans, eliminate more regulations, maintain the status quo     on health care, our deficits will go away.The problem is that's what we     did for eight years.That's what helped us into this crisis.It's what     helped lead to these deficits.We can't do it again. Rather than fight the same     tired battles that have dominated Washington for decades, it's time to     try something new.Let's invest in our people without leaving them a     mountain of debt.Let's meet our responsibility to the citizens who sent     us here.Let's try common sense -- a novel concept. Now, to do that we have to     recognize that we face more than a deficit of dollars right now.We     face a deficit of trust -- deep and corrosive doubts about how     Washington works that have been growing for years.To close that     credibility gap we have to take action on both ends of Pennsylvania     Avenue -- to end the outsized influence of lobbyists; to do our work     openly; to give our people the government they deserve. Now, that's what I came to     Washington to do.That's why, for the first time in history, my Administration posts on our  With all due deference to      separation of powers, last week the  I'm also calling on Congress     to continue down the path of earmark reform -- Democrats and     Republicans, Democrats and Republicans.Look...you've trimmed some of this     spending; you've embraced some meaningful change.But restoring the     public trust demands more.For example, some members of Congress post     some earmark requests online. Tonight, I'm calling on Congress to     publish all earmark requests on a single Web site before there's a vote,     so that the American people can see how their money is being spent. Of course, none of these     reforms will even happen if we don't also reform how we work with one     another.Now, I'm not nave.I never thought that the mere fact of my     election would usher in peace and harmony, and some post-partisan     era.I knew that both parties have fed divisions that are deeply     entrenched.And on some issues, there are simply philosophical     differences that will always cause us to part ways. These disagreements,     about the role of government in our lives, about our national priorities     and our national security, they've been taking place for over 200     years. They're the very essence of our democracy. But what frustrates the     American people is a Washington where every day is "Election Day."We     can't wage a perpetual campaign where the only goal is to see who can     get the most embarrassing headlines about the other side -- a belief     that if you lose, I win.1Neither party should delay or obstruct every     single bill just because they can. The confirmation of -- I'm speaking     to both parties now -- the confirmation of well-qualified public servants     shouldn't be held hostage to the pet projects or grudges of a few     individual senators. Washington may think that     saying anything about the other side, no matter how false, no matter how     malicious, is just part of the game.But it's precisely such politics     that has stopped either party from helping the American people.Worse     yet -- Worse yet, it's sowing further division among our citizens, further distrust     in our government. So, no, I will not give up     on trying to change the tone of our politics. I know it's an election     year. And after last week, it's clear that campaign fever has come even     earlier than usual.But we still need to govern. To Democrats, I would remind     you that we still have the largest majority in decades, and the people     expect us to solve problems, not run for the hills.And if the     Republican leadership is going to insist that -- that 60 votes in the Senate are     required to do any business at all in this town -- a supermajority --     then the responsibility to govern is now yours as well.Just saying no     to everything may be good short-term politics, but it's not leadership.We were sent here to serve our citizens, not our ambitions. So let's     show the American people that we can do it together. This week -- This week, I'll be     meet -- addressing a meeting of the House Republicans. I'd like to begin monthly     meetings with both Democratic and Republican leadership. I know you     can't wait. Now, throughout our history, no     issue has united this country more than our security. Sadly, some of the     unity we felt after 9/11 has dissipated.Now, we can argue all we want about     who's to blame for this, but I'm not interested in re-litigating the     past. I know that all of us love this country.All of us are committed     to its defense.So let's put aside the schoolyard taunts about who     is     tough.Let's reject the false choice between protecting our people and     upholding our values.Let's leave behind the fear and division, and do     what it takes to defend our nation and forge a more hopeful future --     for America and for the world. That's the work we began     last year.Since the day I took office, we've renewed our focus on the     terrorists who threaten our nation.We've made substantial investments     in our homeland security and disrupted plots that threatened to take     American lives.We are filling unacceptable gaps revealed by the failed     Christmas attack, with better airline security and swifter action on our     intelligence.We've prohibited torture and strengthened partnerships     from the Pacific to South Asia to the Arabian Peninsula.And in the last     year, hundreds of al Qaeda's fighters and affiliates, including many     senior leaders, have been captured or killed -- far more than in 2008. And in Afghanistan, we're     increasing our troops and training Afghan security forces so they can     begin to take the lead in July of 2011, and our troops can begin to come     home.We will reward good governance, work to reduce corruption, and     support the rights of all Afghans -- men and women alike. We're joined     by allies and partners who have increased their own commitments, and who     will come together tomorrow in London to reaffirm our common     purpose.There will be difficult days ahead.But I am absolutely     confident we will succeed. As we take the fight to al     Qaeda, we are responsibly leaving Iraq to its people.As a candidate, I     promised that I would end this war, and that is what I am doing as     President.We will have all of our combat troops out of Iraq by the end     of this August. We will support -- We will support the Iraqi government --     We will support     the Iraqi government as they hold elections, and we will continue to     partner with the Iraqi people to promote regional peace and     prosperity.But make no mistake:This war is ending, and all of our     troops are coming home. Tonight, all of our men and     women in uniform -- in Iraq, in Afghanistan, and around the world --     they have to know that we -- that...they have our respect, our gratitude,     our full support.And just as they must have the resources they need in     war, we all have a responsibility to support them when they come     home.That's why we made the largest increase in investments for     veterans in decades last year.That's why we're building a 21st     century VA.And that's why Michelle has joined with Jill Biden to forge     a national  commitment to support military families. Now, even as we prosecute     two wars, we're also confronting perhaps the greatest danger to the     American people -- the threat of nuclear weapons. I've embraced the     vision of John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan through a strategy that     reverses the spread of these weapons and seeks a world without them. To     reduce our stockpiles and launchers, while ensuring our deterrent, the     United States and Russia are completing negotiations on the     farthest-reachings arms control treaty in nearly two decades.And at     April's Nuclear Security Summit, we will bring 44 nations together here     in Washington, D.C. behind a clear goal:securing all vulnerable nuclear     materials around the world in four years, so that they never fall into     the hands of terrorists. Now, these diplomatic     efforts have also strengthened our hand in dealing with those nations     that insist on violating international agreements in pursuit of nuclear     weapons.That's why North Korea now faces increased isolation and     stronger sanctions -- sanctions that are being vigorously     enforced.That's why the international community is more united and the     Islamic Republic of Iran is more isolated.And as Iran's leaders     continue to ignore their obligations, there should be no doubt:They,     too, will face growing consequences.That is a promise. That's the leadership that     we are providing -- engagement that advances the common security and     prosperity of all people. We're working through the G20 to sustain a     lasting global recovery. We're working with Muslim communities around     the world to promote science and education and innovation. We have gone     from a bystander to a leader in the fight against climate change. We're     helping developing countries to feed themselves, and continuing the     fight against HIV/AIDS.And we are launching a new initiative that will     give us the capacity to respond faster and more effectively to     bioterrorism or an infectious disease -- a plan that will counter     threats at home and strengthen public health abroad. As we have for over 60     years, America takes these actions because our destiny is connected to     those beyond our shores.But we also do it because it is right.That's     why, as we meet here tonight, over 10,000 Americans are working with     many nations to help the people of Haiti recover and rebuild.That's why     we stand with the girl who yearns to go to school in Afghanistan; why we     support the human rights of the women marching through the streets of     Iran; why we advocate for the young man denied a job by corruption in     Guinea. For America must always stand on the side of freedom and human     dignity. Always. Abroad, America's greatest     source of strength has always been our ideals.The same is true at     home. We find unity in our incredible diversity, drawing on the promise     enshrined in our Constitution:the notion that we're all created equal;     that no matter who you are or what you look like, if you abide by the     law you should be protected by it; if you adhere to our common values     you should be treated no different than anyone else. We must continually renew     this promise. My Administration has a     Civil Rights     Division that is once     again prosecuting civil rights violations and employment     discrimination.We finally strengthened -- We finally strengthened our laws to protect against     crimes driven by hate.This year -- This year, I will work with Congress and our     military to finally repeal the law that denies gay Americans the right     to serve the country they love because of who they are.It's the right     thing to do. We're going to crack down on     violations of equal pay laws so that women get equal pay for an equal     day's work.And we should continue the work of fixing our broken     immigration system -- to secure our borders and enforce our laws, and     ensure that everyone who plays by the rules can contribute to our     economy and enrich our nations. In the end, it's our ideals,     our values that built America -- values that allowed us to forge a     nation made up of immigrants from every corner of the globe; values that     drive our citizens still. Every day, Americans meet their     responsibilities to their families and their employers.Time and again,     they lend a hand to their neighbors and give back to their country.They     take pride in their labor, and are generous in spirit.These aren't     Republican values or Democratic values that they're living by; business     values or labor values.They're American values. Unfortunately, too many of     our citizens have lost faith that our biggest institutions -- our     corporations, our media, and, yes, our government -- still reflect these     same values.Each of these institutions are full of honorable men and     women doing important work that helps our country prosper.But each time     a CEO rewards himself for failure, or a banker puts the rest of us at     risk for his own selfish gain, people's doubts grow. Each time lobbyists     game the system or politicians tear each other down instead of lifting     this country up, we lose faith.The more that TV pundits reduce serious     debates to silly arguments, big issues into sound bites, our citizens     turn away. No wonder there's so much     cynicism out there.No wonder there's so much disappointment. I campaigned on the promise     of change -- "Change we can believe in" -- the slogan went.And right     now, I know there are many Americans who aren't sure if they still     believe we can change -- or that I can deliver it. But remember this -- I never     suggested that change would be easy, or that I could do it alone.Democracy in a nation of 300 million people can be noisy and messy and     complicated. And when you try to do big things and make big changes, it     stirs passions and controversy.That's just how it is. Those of us in public office     can respond to this reality by playing it safe and avoid telling hard     truths and pointing fingers.We can do what's necessary to keep our     poll numbers high, and get through the next election instead of doing     what's best for the next generation. But I also know this:If     people had made that decision 50 years ago, or 100 years ago, or 200     years ago, we wouldn't be here tonight. The only reason we are here is     because generations of Americans were unafraid to do what was hard; to     do what was needed even when success was uncertain; to do what it took     to keep the dream of this nation alive for their children and their     grandchildren. Our Administration has had     some political setbacks this year, and some of them were deserved. But     I wake up every day knowing that they are nothing compared to the     setbacks that families all across this country have faced this year.And what keeps me going, what keeps me fighting, is that despite all     these setbacks, that spirit of determination and optimism, that     fundamental decency that has always been at the core of the American     people -- that lives on. It lives on in the     struggling small business owner who wrote to me of his company: "None of     us," he said, "are willing to consider, even slightly, that we might     fail." It lives on in the woman who     said that even though she and her neighbors have felt the pain of     recession, "We are strong.We are resilient. We are American." It lives on in the     8-year-old boy in Louisiana, who just sent me his allowance and asked if     I would give it to the people of Haiti. And it lives on in all the     Americans who've dropped everything to go someplace they've never been     and pull people they've never known from the rubble, prompting chants of     "U.S.A.! U.S.A.! U.S.A!" when another life was saved. The spirit that has     sustained this nation for more than two centuries lives on in you, its     people.  We have finished a difficult year.We have come through a     difficult decade.But a new year has come.A new decade stretches before     us.We don't quit.I don't quit. Let's seize this moment -- to start     anew, to carry the dream forward, and to strengthen our union once more. Thank you.God bless you.     And God bless the United States of America.      1 Also in this database:     2001 2002 WhiteHouse.gov U.S. Copyright Status: Text, Audio, Images = Public domain.