Thank you ladies and gentlemen for a very warm reception. Thank you ladies and gentlemen for a very warm reception. It was one hundred and forty-four years ago that members of the Democratic Partyfirst met in convention to select a Presidential candidate. Since thattime, Democratshave continued to convene once every four years anddraft a party platform and nominate a Presidential candidate. And our meetingthis week is a continuation of that tradition. But there is something differentabout tonight. There is something special about tonight. What is different?What is special?  I, Barbara Jordan, am a keynote speaker. When -- A lot of years passed since 1832, and during that time it would havebeen most unusual for any national political party to ask a BarbaraJordan to deliver a keynote address. But tonight, here I am. And I feel -- I feel thatnotwithstanding the past that my presence here is one additional bit ofevidence that the American Dream need not forever be deferred. Now -- Now that I have this grand distinction, what in the world am I supposedto say? I could easily spend this time praising the accomplishments ofthis party and attacking the Republicans -- but I don't choose to do that.I could list the many problems which Americans have. I could list the problemswhich cause people to feel cynical, angry, frustrated: problems which includelack of integrity in government; the feeling that the individual no longercounts; the reality of material and spiritual poverty; the feeling thatthe grand American experiment is failing or has failed. I could recitethese problems, and then I could sit down and offer no solutions. But Idon't choose to do that either. The citizens of America expect more. Theydeserve and they want more than a recital of problems. We are a people in a quandary about the present. We are a people insearch of our future. We are a people in search of a national community.We are a people trying not only to solve the problems of the present, unemployment,inflation, but we are attempting on a larger scale to fulfill the promiseof America. We are attempting to fulfill our national purpose, to create and sustain a society in which all of us are equal. Throughout -- Throughout our history, when people have looked for new ways to solve their problems and to uphold the principles of this nation, many times they have turned to political parties. They have often turned to the Democratic Party. What is it? What is it about the Democratic Party that makes it the instrument the people use when they search for ways to shape their future? Well I believe the answer to that question lies in our concept of governing. Our concept of governing is derived from our view of people. It is a concept deeply rooted in a set of beliefs firmly etched in the national conscience of all of us. Now what are these beliefs? First, we believe in equality for all andprivileges for none. This is a belief -- This is a belief that each American, regardless ofbackground, has equal standing in the public forum -- all of us. Because -- Because webelieve this idea so firmly, we are an inclusive rather than an exclusiveparty. Let everybody come. I think it no accident that most of those immigratingto America in the 19th century identified with the Democratic Party. Weare a heterogeneous party made up of Americans of diverse backgrounds.We believe that the people are the source of all governmental power; that the authority of the people is to be extended, not restricted. This -- This can be accomplished only by providing each citizen with every opportunity to participate in the management of the government. They must have that, we believe. We believe that the government which represents the authority of all the people, not just one interest group, but all the people, has an obligation to actively -- underscore actively -- seek to remove those obstacles which would block individual achievement -- obstacles emanating from race, sex, economic condition. The government must remove them, seek to remove them. We. We are a party -- We are a party of innovation. We do not reject our traditions, but we are willing to adapt to changing circumstances, when change we must. We are willing to suffer the discomfort of change in order to achieve a better future. We have a positive vision of the future founded on the belief that the gap between the promise and reality of America can one day be finally closed. We believe that. This, my friends is the bedrock of our concept of governing. This isa part of the reason why Americans have turned to the Democratic Party.These are the foundations upon which a national community can be built. Let all understand that these guiding principles cannot be discardedfor short-term political gains. They represent what this country is allabout. They are indigenous to the American idea. And these are principleswhich are not negotiable. In other times -- In other times, I could stand here and give this kind of expositionon the beliefs of the Democratic Party and that would be enough. But todaythat is not enough. People want more. That is not sufficient reason forthe majority of the people of this country to decide to vote Democratic. Even as I stand here and admit that we have made mistakes, I still believe that as the people of America sit in judgment on each party, they will recognize that our mistakes were mistakes of the heart. They'll recognize that. And now -- now we must look to the future. Let us heed the voice of the peopleand recognize their common sense. If we do not, we not only blaspheme ourpolitical heritage, we ignore the common ties that bind all Americans.Many fear the future. Many are distrustful of their leaders, and believethat their voices are never heard. Many seek only to satisfy their privatework -- wants; to satisfy their private interests. But this is the great dangerAmerica faces -- that we will cease to be one nation and become instead acollection of interest groups: city against suburb, region against region,individual against individual; each seeking to satisfy private wants. Ifthat happens, who then will speak for America? Who then will speak for the common good? This is the question which must be answered in 1976: Are we to be one people bound together by common spirit, sharing in acommon endeavor; or will we become a divided nation? For all of its uncertainty,we cannot flee the future. We must not become the "New Puritans" and rejectour society. We must address and master the future together. It can bedone if we restore the belief that we share a sense of national community,that we share a common national endeavor. It can be done. There is no executive order; there is no law that can require the Americanpeople to form a national community. This we must do as individuals, and if we do it as individuals, there is no President of the United States who can veto that decision. As a first step -- As a first step, we must restore our belief in ourselves. We are a generous people, so why can't we be generous with each other? Weneed to take to heart the words spoken by Thomas Jefferson: Let us restore the social intercourse -- "Let us restore to social intercourse that harmony andthat affection without which liberty and even life are but drearythings." A nation is formed by the willingness of each of us to share in theresponsibility for upholding the common good. A government is invigoratedwhen each one of us is willing to participate in shaping the future ofthis nation. In this election year, we must define the "common good" and beginagain to shape a  common future.Let each person do his or her part. If one citizen is unwilling to participate,all of us are going to suffer. For the American idea, though it is sharedby all of us, is realized in each one of us. And now, what are those of us who are elected public officials supposedto do? We call ourselves "public servants" but I'll tell you this: We aspublic servants must set an example for the rest of the nation. It is hypocriticalfor the public official to admonish and exhort the people to uphold thecommon good if we are derelict in upholding the common good. More is required -- More is required of public officials than slogans and handshakesand press releases. More is required. We must hold ourselves strictly accountable.We must provide the people with a vision of the future. If we promise as public officials, we must deliver. If -- If we as publicofficials propose, we must produce. If we say to the American people, "Itis time for you to be sacrificial" -- sacrifice. If the public official says that, we [public officials] must be the first to give. We must be. Andagain, if we make mistakes, we must be willing to admit them. We have todo that. What we have to do is strike a balance between the idea that government should do everything and the idea, the belief, that government ought to do nothing. Strike a balance. Let there be no illusions about the difficulty of forming this kindof a national community. It's tough, difficult, not easy. But a spiritof harmony will survive in America only if each of us remembers that weshare a common destiny; if each of us remembers, when self-interest and bitterness seem to prevail, that we share a common destiny. I have confidence that we can form this kind of national community. I have confidence that the Democratic Party can lead the way. I have that confidence. We cannot improve on the system of government handed down to us by thefounders of the Republic. There is no way to improve upon that. But whatwe can do is to find new ways to implement that system and realize ourdestiny. Now I began this speech by commenting to you on the uniqueness of aBarbara Jordan making a keynote address. Well I am going to close myspeech by quoting a Republican President and I ask you that as you listento these words of Abraham Lincoln, relate them to the concept of a nationalcommunity in which every last one of us participates: "As I would not be a slave, so I would not be a master." This -- This -- "This expresses my idea of Democracy. Whatever differs from this, to the extent of the difference, is no Democracy." Thank you.  Also in this database:Barbara Jordan - Senate Judiciary Statement on the Nixon Impeachment Hearings Copyright Status: Via the Democratic National Committee,  