The place to begin is with our own experiencewith the Church in the strike that has gone on for thirty-one months in Delano. For inDelano the Church has been involved with the poor in a unique way that should stand as asymbol to other communities. Of course, when we refer to the Church we should define theword a little. We mean the whole Church, the Church as an ecumenical body spread aroundthe world, and not just its particular form in a parish in a local community.  The Church we are talking about is atremendously powerful institution in our society, and in the world. That Church is oneform of the Presence of God on Earth, and so naturally it is powerful. It is powerful bydefinition. It is a powerful moral and spiritual force which cannot be ignored by anymovement. Furthermore, it is an organization with tremendous wealth. Since the Church isto be servant to the poor, it is our fault if that wealth is not channeled to help thepoor in our world. In a small way we have been able, in the Delano strike, to worktogether with the Church in such a way as to bring some of its moral and economic power tobear on those who want to maintain the status quo, keeping farm workers in virtualenslavement. In brief, here is what happened in Delano.  Some years ago, when some of us were workingwith the Community Service Organization, we began to realize the powerful effect which theChurch can have on the conscience of the opposition. In scattered instances, in San Jose,Sacramento, Oakland, Los Angeles and other places, priests would speak out loudly andclearly against specific instances of oppression, and in some cases, stand with the peoplewho were being hurt. Furthermore, a small group of priests, Frs. McDonald, McCollough,Duggan and others, began to pinpoint attention on the terrible situation of the farmworkers in our state.  At about that same time, we began to run intothe California Migrant Ministry in the camps and field. They were about the only onesthere, and a lot of us were very suspicious, since we were Catholics and they wereProtestants. However, they had developed a very clear conception of the Church. It wascalled to serve, to be at the mercy of the poor, and not to try to use them. After a whilethis made a lot of sense to us, and we began to find ourselves working side by side withthem. In fact, it forced us to raise the question why ourChurchwas not doing the same.  We would ask, why do the Protestants come outhere and help the people, demand nothing, and give all their time to serving farm workers,while our own parish priests stay in their churches, where only a few people come, andusually feel uncomfortable? It was not until some of us moved to Delano and beganworking to build the National Farm Workers Association that we really saw how far removedfrom the people the parish Church was. In fact, we could not get any help at all from thepriests of Delano. When the strike began, they told us we could not even use the Churchesauditorium for the meetings. The farm workers money helped build that auditorium! But theProtestants were there again, in the form of the California Migrant Ministry, and theybegan to help in little ways, here and there. When the strike started in 1965, most of ourfriends forsook us for a while. They ran- or were just too busy to help. But theCalifornia Migrant Ministry held a meeting with its staff and decided that the strike wasa matter of life or death for farm workers everywhere, and that even if it meant the endof the Migrant Ministry they would turn over their resources to the strikers. Thepolitical pressure on the Protestant Churches was tremendous and the Migrant Ministry losta lot of money. But they stuck it out, and they began to point the way to the rest of theChurch. In fact, when 30 of the strikers were arrested for shouting Huelga, 11ministers went to jail with them. They were in Delano that day at the request of ChrisHartmire, director of the California Migrant Ministry. Then the workers began to raise the question:why ministers? Why not priests? What does the Bishop say? But the Bishop said nothing. Butslowly the pressure of the people grew and grew, until finally we have in Delano a priestsent by the new Bishop, Timothy Manning, who is there to help minister to the needs offarm workers. His name is Father Mark Day and he is the Unions chaplain. Finally,our own Catholic Church has decided to recognize that we have our won peculiar needs, justas the growers have theirs.  But outside of the local diocese, thepressure built up on growers to negotiate was tremendous. Though we were not allowed tohave our own priest, the power of the ecumenical body of the Church was tremendous. Thework of the Church, for example, in the Schenley, Di Giorgio, Perelly-Minetti strikes wasfantastic. They applied pressure- and they mediated. When poor people get involved in along conflict, such as a strike, or a civil rights drive, and the pressure increases eachday, there is a deep need for spiritual advice. Without it we see families crumble,leadership weaken, and hard workers grow tired. And in such a situation the spiritualadvice must be given by a friend, not by the opposition. What sense does it make to go toMass on Sunday and reach out for spiritual help, and instead get sermons about thewickedness of your cause? That only drives one to question and to despair.  The growers in Delano have their spiritualproblems... we do not deny that. They have every right to have priests and ministers whoserve their needs. But we have different needs, and soweneeded a friendly spiritual guide. And this is true in every community inthis state where the poor face tremendous problems. But the opposition raises a tremendoushowl about this. They don't want us to have our spiritual advisors, friendly to our needs.Why is this? Why indeed except that THERE IS TREMENDOUS SPIRITUAL AND ECONOMIC POWER INTHE CHURCH. The rich know it, and for that reason they choose to keep it from the people.  The leadership of the Mexican-AmericanCommunity must admit that we have fallen far short in our task of helping providespiritual guidance for our people. We may say, I dont feel any such need. I can getalong. But that is a poor excuse for not helping provide such help for others. For we canalso say, I dont need any welfare help. I can take care of my own problems But weare all willing to fight like hell for welfare aid for those who truly need it, who wouldstarve without it. Likewise we may have gotten an education and not care about scholarshipmoney for ourselves, or our children. But we would, we should, fight like hell to see toit that our state provides aid for any child needing it so that he can get the educationhe desires.  Likewise we can say we don't need the Church.That is our business. But there are hundreds of thousands of our people who desperatelyneed some help from that powerful institution, the Church, and we are foolish not to helpthem get it. For example, the Catholic Charities agencies of the Catholic Church hasmillions of dollars earmarked for the poor. But often the money is spent for food basketsfor the needy instead of for effective action to eradicate the causes of poverty. The menand women who administer this money sincerely want to help their brothers. It should beour duty to help direct the attention to the basic needs of the Mexican-Americans in oursociety... needs which cannot be satisfied with baskets of food, but rather with effectiveorganizing at the grass roots level.  Therefore, I am calling for Mexican-Americangroups to stop ignoring this source of power. It is not just our right to appeal to theChurch to use its power effectively for the poor, it is our duty to do so. It should be asnatural as appealing to government... and we do that often enough.  Furthermore, we should be prepared to come tothe defense of that priest, rabbi, minister, or layman of the Church, who out ofcommitment to truth and justice gets into a tight place with his pastor or bishop. Itbehooves us to stand with that man and help him see his trial through. It is our duty tosee to it that his rights of conscience are respected and that no bishop, pastor or otherhigher body takes that God-given, human right away.  Finally, in a nutshell, what do we want theChurch to do? We dont ask for more cathedrals. We dont ask for bigger churchesof fine gifts. We ask for its presence with us, beside us, as Christ among us. We ask theChurch to sacrifice with the people for social change, for justice, and for love ofbrother. We dont ask for words. We ask for deeds. We dont ask for paternalism.We ask for servanthood. Copyright Status:Text = Restricted, seek permission. Image (Screenshot) = Uncertain. Permission Request Contact Information Beatriz Beltran, Office Manager and Executive AssistantCesar E. Chavez Foundation500 North Brand Boulevard Suite 1650Glendale, CA 91203Phone: 818-265-0300