[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly from audio.] Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, and DistinguishedMembers of the Congress: I stand on this rostrum with a sense of deephumility and greatpride -- humility in the wake of those great American architects of our history whohave stood here before me; pride in the reflection that this forum of legislativedebate represents human liberty in the purest form yet devised. Here are centered the hopes and aspirationsand faith of the entire human race. I do not stand here as advocate for anypartisan cause, for the issues are fundamental and reach quite beyond the realmof partisan consideration. They must be resolved on the highest plane ofnational interest if our course is to prove sound and our future protected. Itrust, therefore, that you will do me the justice of receiving that which I haveto say as solely expressing the considered viewpoint of a fellow American. I address you with neither rancor norbitterness in the fading twilight of life, with but one purpose in mind: toserve my country. The issues are global and so interlocked that to consider theproblems of one sector, oblivious to those of another, is butto court disaster for the whole. While Asia is commonly referred to as theGateway to Europe, it is no less true that Europe is the Gateway to Asia, andthe broad influence of the one cannot fail to have its impact upon the other.There are those who claim our strength is inadequate to protect on both fronts,that we cannot divide our effort. I can think of no greater expression ofdefeatism. If a potential enemy can divide his strengthon two fronts, it is for us to counter his effort. The Communist threat is aglobal one. Its successful advance in one sector threatens the destruction ofevery other sector. You can not appease or otherwise surrender to communism inAsia without simultaneously undermining our efforts to halt its advance inEurope. Beyond pointing out these general truisms, Ishall confine my discussion to the general areas of Asia. Before one mayobjectively assess the situation now existing there, he must comprehendsomething of Asia's past and the revolutionary changes which have marked hercourse up to the present. Long exploited by the so-called colonial powers, withlittle opportunity to achieve any degree of social justice, individual dignity,or a higher standard of life such as guided our own noble administration in thePhilippines, the peoples of Asia found their opportunity in the war just past tothrow off the shackles of colonialism and now see the dawn of new opportunity,a heretofore unfelt dignity, and the self-respect of political freedom. Musteringhalf of the earth's population, and 60 percent of its natural resources thesepeoples are rapidly consolidating a new force, both moral and material, withwhich to raise the living standard and erect adaptations of the design of modernprogress to their own distinct cultural environments. Whether one adheres to theconcept of colonization or not, this is the direction of Asian progress andit may not be stopped. It is a corollary to the shift of the world economicfrontiers as the whole epicenter of world affairs rotates back toward the areawhence it started. In this situation, it becomes vital that ourown country orient its policies in consonance with this basic evolutionarycondition rather than pursue a course blind to the reality that the colonial era isnow past and the Asian peoples covet the right to shape their own free destiny.What they seek now is friendly guidance, understanding, and support -- notimperious direction -- the dignity of equality and not the shame of subjugation.Their pre-war standard of life, pitifully low, is infinitely lower now in thedevastation left in war's wake. World ideologies play little part in Asianthinking and are little understood. What the peoples strive for is theopportunity for a little more food in their stomachs, a little better clothingon their backs, a little firmer roof over their heads, and the realization ofthe normal nationalist urge for political freedom. These political-socialconditions have but an indirect bearing upon our own national security, but doform a backdrop to contemporary planning which must be thoughtfully consideredif we are to avoid the pitfalls of unrealism. Of more direct and immediate bearing uponour national security are the changes wrought in the strategic potential of thePacific Ocean in the course of the past war. Prior thereto the western strategicfrontier of the United States lay on the littoral line of the Americas, with anexposed island salient extending out through Hawaii, Midway, and Guam to thePhilippines. That salient proved not an outpost of strength but an avenue ofweakness along which the enemy could and did attack. The Pacific was a potential area of advancefor any predatory force intent upon striking at the bordering land areas. Allthis was changed by our Pacific victory. Our strategic frontier then shifted toembrace the entire Pacific Ocean, which became a vast moat to protect us as longas we heldit. Indeed, it acts as a protective shield for all of the Americas and all freelands of the Pacific Ocean area. We control it to the shores of Asia by a chainof islands extending in an arc from the Aleutians to the Mariannas held by usand our free allies. From this island chain we can dominate with sea and airpower every Asiatic port from Vladivostok to Singapore -- with sea and air powerevery port, as I said, from Vladivostok to Singapore -- and prevent any hostilemovement into the Pacific. * Under such conditions, the Pacific no longerrepresents menacing avenues of approach for a prospective invader. It assumes,instead, the friendly aspect of a peaceful lake. Our line of defense is anatural one and can be maintained with a minimum of military effort and expense.It envisions no attack against anyone, nor does it provide the bastionsessential for offensive operations, but properly maintained, would be aninvincible defense against aggression. Theholding of this littoral defense line in the westernPacific is entirely dependent upon holding all segments thereof; for any majorbreach of that line by an unfriendly power would render vulnerable to determined attack every other major segment. This is a military estimate as to which I have yet to find a military leader who will take exception. For that reason, I have strongly recommended in the past, as a matter of military urgency, that under no circumstances must Formosa fall under Communist control. Such an eventuality would at once threaten the freedom of the Philippines and the loss of Japan and might well force our western frontier back to the coast of California, Oregon and Washington. To understand the changes which now appearupon the Chinese mainland, one must understand the changes in Chinese characterand culture over the past 50 years. China, up to 50 years ago, was completelynon-homogenous, being compartmented into groups divided against each other. Thewar-making tendency was almost non-existent, as they still followed the tenets ofthe Confucian ideal of pacifist culture. At the turn of the century, under theregime of Chang Tso Lin, efforts toward greater homogeneity produced the start ofa nationalist urge. This was further and more successfully developed under theleadership of Chiang Kai-Shek, but has been brought to its greatest fruitionunder the present regime to the point that it has now taken on the character ofa united nationalism of increasingly dominant, aggressive tendencies. Through these past 50 years the Chinesepeople have thus become militarized in their concepts and in their ideals. Theynow constitute excellent soldiers, with competent staffs and commanders. Thishas produced a new and dominant power in Asia, which, for its own purposes, isallied with Soviet Russia but which in its own concepts and methods has becomeaggressively imperialistic, with a lust for expansion and increased powernormal to this type of imperialism. There is little of the ideological concepteither one way or another in the Chinese make-up. The standard of living is solow and the capital accumulation has been so thoroughly dissipated by war thatthe masses are desperate and eager to follow any leadership which seems topromise the alleviation of local stringencies. I have from the beginning believed that theChinese Communists' support of the North Koreans was the dominant one. Theirinterests are, at present, parallel with those of the Soviet. But I believe thatthe aggressiveness recently displayed not only in Korea but also in Indo-Chinaand Tibet and pointing potentially toward the South reflects predominantly thesame lust for the expansion of power which has animated every would-be conquerorsince the beginning of time. The Japanese people, since the war, haveundergone the greatest reformation recorded in modern history. With acommendable will, eagerness to learn, and marked capacity to understand, theyhave, from the ashes left in war's wake, erected in Japan an edifice dedicated tothe supremacy of individual liberty and personal dignity; and in the ensuingprocess there has been created a trulyrepresentative government committedto the advance of political morality, freedom of economic enterprise, and socialjustice.  Politically, economically, and socially Japanis now abreast of many free nations of the earth and will not again fail theuniversal trust. That it may be counted upon to wield a profoundly beneficialinfluence over the course of events in Asia is attested by the magnificentmanner in which the Japanese people have met the recent challenge of war, unrest, and confusion surrounding them from the outside and checked communism withintheir own frontiers without the slightest slackening in their forward progress.I sent all four of our occupation divisions to the Korean battlefront withoutthe slightest qualms as to the effect of the resulting power vacuum upon Japan.The results fully justified my faith. I know of no nation more serene, orderly, and industrious, nor in which higher hopes can be entertained for futureconstructive service in the advance of the human race. Of our former ward, the Philippines, we canlook forward in confidence that the existing unrest will be corrected and astrong and healthy nation will grow in the longer aftermath of war's terribledestructiveness. We must be patient and understanding and never fail them -- as inour hour of need, they did not fail us. A Christian nation, the Philippines stand asa mighty bulwark of Christianity in theFar East, and its capacityfor high moral leadership in Asia is unlimited.  On Formosa, the government of theRepublic of China has had the opportunity to refute by action much of themalicious gossip which so undermined the strength of its leadership on theChinese mainland. The Formosan people are receiving a just and enlightenedadministration with majority representation on the organs of government, andpolitically, economically, and socially they appear to be advancing along soundand constructive lines. With this brief insight into the surroundingareas,I now turn to the Korean conflict. While I was not consulted prior to the President's decision to intervene in support of the Republic of Korea, that decision from a military standpoint, proved a sound one, as we -- as I said, proved a sound one, as we hurled back the invader and decimated his forces. Our victory was complete, and our objectiveswithin reach, when Red China intervened with numerically superior ground forces. This created a new war and an entirely newsituation, a situation not contemplated when our forces were committed againstthe North Korean invaders; a situation which called for new decisions in thediplomatic sphere to permit the realistic adjustment of militarystrategy. Such decisions have not been forthcoming. While no man in his rightmind would advocate sending our ground forces into continental China, and suchwas never given a thought, the new situation did urgently demand a drasticrevision of strategic planning if our political aim was to defeat this new enemyas we had defeated the old Apart from the military need, as I saw It, toneutralize thesanctuary protection given the enemy north of the Yalu, I felt that militarynecessity in the conduct of the war made necessary: first the intensification of oureconomic blockade against China; two the imposition of a naval blockade against the China coast; three removal of restrictions on air reconnaissance of China'scoastal areasand of Manchuria;  four removal of restrictions on the forces of the Republic ofChina on Formosa, with logistical support to contribute to their effective operationsagainst the common enemy. For entertaining these views, allprofessionally designed to support our forces committed to Korea and bring hostilitiesto an end with the least possible delay and at a saving of countless American and allied lives, I have been severely criticized in lay circles,principally abroad, despite my understanding that from a military standpoint theabove views have been fully shared in the past by practically every militaryleader concerned with the Korean campaign, including our own Joint Chiefs ofStaff.  I called for reinforcements but was informedthat reinforcements were not available. I made clear that if not permitted todestroy the enemy built-up bases north of the Yalu, if not permitted to utilizethe friendly Chinese Force of some 600,000 men on Formosa, if not permitted toblockade the China coast to prevent the Chinese Reds from getting succor fromwithout, and if there were to be no hope of major reinforcements, the position ofthe command from the military standpoint forbade victory. We could hold in Korea by constant maneuverand in an approximate area where our supply line advantages were in balance withthe supply line disadvantages of the enemy, but we could hope at best for onlyan indecisive campaign with its terrible and constant attrition upon our forcesif the enemy utilized its full military potential. I have constantly called forthe new political decisions essential to a solution. Efforts have been made to distort myposition. It has been said, in effect, that I was a warmonger. Nothing could befurther from the truth. I know war as few other men now living know it, andnothing to me is more revolting. I have long advocated itscomplete abolition, as its very destructiveness on both friend and foe hasrendered it useless as a means of settling international disputes. Indeed, onthe second day of September, nineteen hundred and forty-five, just following thesurrender of the Japanese nation on the Battleship Missouri, I formallycautioned as follows: Men since the beginning of time havesought peace. Various methods through theages have been attempted to devise aninternational process to prevent or settle disputes between nations. From the verystart workable methods were found in sofar as individual citizens were concerned,but the mechanics of an instrumentality oflarger international scope have neverbeen successful. Military alliances,balances of power, Leagues of Nations,all in turn failed, leaving the only path tobe  by way of the crucible of war. Theutter destructiveness of war now blocksout this alternative. We have had our lastchance. If we will not devise somegreater and more equitable system,Armageddon will be at our door. The problem basically is theological andinvolves a spiritual recrudescence and improvement of human character that willsynchronize with our almost matchlessadvances in science, art, literature, and allmaterial and cultural developments ofthe past 2000 years. It must be of the spiritif we are to save the flesh. B War's very object is victory, not prolonged indecision. In war there isno substitute for victory. There are some who, for varying reasons, wouldappease Red China. They are blind to history's clear lesson, for history teacheswith unmistakable emphasis that appeasement but begets new and bloodier war. Itpoints to no single instance where this end has justified that means, whereappeasement has led to more than a sham peace. Like blackmail, it lays the basisfor new and successively greater demands until, as in blackmail, violencebecomes the only other alternative. "Why," my soldiers asked of me, "surrender militaryadvantages to an enemy in the field?" I could not answer. Some may say: to avoid spread of the conflictinto an all-out war with China; others, to avoid Soviet intervention. Neitherexplanation seems valid, for China is already engaging with the maximum power itcan commit, and the Soviet will not necessarily mesh its actions with our moves.Like a cobra, any new enemy will more likely strike whenever it feels that therelativity in military or other potential is in its favor on a world-widebasis. The tragedy of Korea is further heightened bythe fact that its military action is confined to its territorial limits. Itcondemns that nation, which it is our purpose to save, to suffer the devastatingimpact of full naval and air bombardment while the enemy's sanctuaries are fullyprotected from such attack and devastation. Of the nations of the world, Korea alone, up to now, is the sole one which has risked its all against communism. The magnificence of the courage and fortitude of the Korean people defies description.  They have chosen to risk death rather than slavery. Their last words to me were: "Don't scuttle the Pacific!" I have just left your fighting sons in Korea.They have met all tests there, and I can report to you without reservation that they are splendid in every way. It was my constant effort to preserve them and end this savage conflict honorably and with the least loss of time and a minimum sacrifice of life. Its growing bloodshed has caused me the deepest anguish and anxiety.  Those gallant men will remain often in my thoughts and in my prayers always. I am closing my 52 years of military service.When I joined the Army, even before the turn of the century, it was thefulfillment of all of my boyish hopes and dreams. The world has turned over manytimes since I took the oath on theplain at West Point, and the hopes anddreams have longsince vanished, but I still remember the refrain of one of the most popularbarrack ballads of that day which proclaimed most proudly that "old soldiersnever die; they just fade away." And like the old soldier of that ballad, I nowclose my military career and just fade away, an old soldier who tried to do hisduty as God gave him the light to see that duty. Good Bye.  Transcription Note: Artifact above modified on 1/07/08. Two instances of the term "literal" were changed to "littoral." Thanks to Yashiro Taketsugu for bringing these transcription errors to my attention.  Also in this database: General Douglas MacArthur - "Duty, Honor, Country" U.S. Copyright Status: 