[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio. (2)] Madam President, Members of the General Assembly: WhenSecretary General Hammarskjolds invitation to address this General Assembly reached me in Bermuda, I was just beginning a series of conferences with the Prime Ministers and Foreign Ministers of Great Britain and of France. Our subject was some of the problems that beset our world. During the remainder of the Bermuda Conference, I had constantly in mind that ahead of me lay a great honor. That honor is mine today, as I stand here, privileged to address the General Assembly of the United Nations. At thesame time that I appreciate the distinction of addressing you, I have a sense ofexhilaration as I look upon this Assembly. Never before in history has so muchhope for so many people been gathered together in a single organization. Yourdeliberations and decisions during these somber years have already realized partof those hopes. But thegreat tests and the great accomplishments still lie ahead. And in the confident expectation of those accomplishments, I would usethe office which, for the time being, I hold, to assure you that the Governmentof the United States will remain steadfast in its support of this body. This we shall do in the conviction that you will provide a great share ofthe wisdom, of the courage, and the faith which can bring to this world lastingpeace for all nations, and happiness and well-being for all men. Clearly,it would not be fitting for me to take this occasion to present to you aunilateral American report on Bermuda.Nevertheless, I assure you that in our deliberations on that lovely island we sought to invoke those same great concepts of universal peace and human dignity which are so cleanly etched in your Charter. Neither would it be a measure of this great opportunity merely to recite, however hopefully, pious platitudes. I therefore decided that this occasion warranted my saying to you some of the things that have been on the minds and hearts of my legislative and executive associates, and on mine, for a great many months -- thoughts I had originally planned to say primarily to the American people. I know that the American people share my deep belief that if a danger exists in the world, it is a danger shared by all; and equally, that if hope exists in the mind of one nation, that hope should be shared by all. Finally, if there is to be advanced any proposal designed to ease even by the smallest measure the tensions of todays world, what more appropriate audience could there be than the members of the General Assembly of the United Nations. I feel impelled to speak today in a language that in a sense is new, one which I, who have spent so much of my life in the military profession, would have preferred never to use. That new language is the language of atomic warfare. The atomicage has moved forward at such a pace that every citizen of the world should havesome comprehension, at least in comparative terms, of the extent of thisdevelopment, of the utmost significance to everyone of us. Clearly, if thepeoples of the world are to conduct an intelligent search for peace, they mustbe armed with the significant facts of todays existence. My recitalof atomic danger and power is necessarily stated in United States terms, forthese are the only incontrovertible facts that I know. I need hardly point outto this Assembly, however, that this subject is global, not merely national incharacter. On July 16, 1945, the United States set off the worlds first atomic explosion. Since that date in 1945, the United States of America has conducted forty-two test explosions. Atomic bombs today are more than twenty-five times as powerful as the weapons with which the atomic age dawned, while hydrogen weapons are in the ranges of millions of tons of TNT equivalent. Today, the United States stockpile of atomic weapons, which, of course, increases daily, exceeds by many times the total [explosive] equivalent of the total of all bombs and all shells that came from every plane and every gun in every theatre of war in all the years of World War II. A single air group, whether afloat or land based, can now deliver to any reachable target a destructive cargo exceeding in power all the bombs that fell on Britain in all of World War II. In size and variety, the development of atomic weapons has been no less remarkable. The development has been such that atomic weapons have virtually achieved conventional status within our armed services. In the United States, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps are all capable of putting this weapon to military use. But the dread secret and the fearful engines of atomic might are not ours alone. In the first place, the secret is possessed by our friends and allies,  Great Britain and Canada, whose scientific genius made a tremendous contribution to our original discoveries and the designs of atomic bombs. The secret is also known by the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union has informed us that, over recent years, it has devoted extensive resources to atomic weapons. During this period the Soviet Union has exploded a series of atomic advices -- devices, including at least one involving thermo-nuclear reactions. If at one time the Unites States possessed what might have been called a monopoly of atomic power, that monopoly ceased to exist several years ago. Therefore, although our earlier start has permitted us to accumulate what is today a great quantitative advantage, the atomic realities of today comprehend two facts of even greater significance. First, the knowledge now possessed by several nations will eventually be shared by others, possibly all others. Second,even a vast superiority in numbers of weapons, and a consequent capability ofdevastating retaliation, is no preventive, of itself, against the fearfulmaterial damage and toll of human lives that would be inflicted by surpriseaggression. The freeworld, at least dimly aware of these facts, has naturally embarked on a largeprogram of warning and defense systems. That program will be accelerated andexpanded. But let no one think that the expenditure of vast sums for weapons andsystems of defense can guarantee absolute safety for the cities and citizens ofany nation. The awful arithmetic of the atomic bomb does not permit of any sucheasy solution. Even against the most powerful defense, an aggressor inpossession of the effective minimum number of atomic bombs for a surprise attackcould probably place a sufficient number of his bombs on the chosen targets tocause hideous damage. Shouldsuch an atomic attack be launched against the United States, our reactions wouldbe swift and resolute. But for me to say that the defense capabilities of theUnited States are such that they could inflict terrible losses upon anaggressor, for me to say that the retaliation capabilities of the Unites Statesare so great that such an aggressors land would be laid waste, all this,while fact, is not the true expression of the purpose and the hope of theUnited States. To pausethere would be to confirm the hopeless finality of a belief that two atomiccolossi are doomed malevolently to eye each other indefinitely across atrembling world. To stop there would be to accept hope -- helplessly the probability ofcivilization destroyed, the annihilation of the irreplaceable heritage ofmankind handed down to use generation from generation, and the condemnation ofmankind to begin all over again the age-old struggle upward from savagerytoward decency, and right, and justice. Surely no sane member of the human racecould discover victory in such desolation. Could anyone wish his name to be coupled by history with such human degradation and destruction? Occasional pages of history do record the faces of the great destroyers, but the whole book of history reveals mankinds never-ending quest for peace and mankinds God-given capacity to build. It is withthe book of history, and not with isolated pages, that the United States willever wish to be identified. My country wants to be constructive, notdestructive. It wants agreements, not wars, among nations. It wants itself tolive in freedom and in the confidence that the people of every other nationenjoy equally the right of choosing their own way of life. So mycountrys purpose is to help us move out of the dark chamber of horrorsinto the light, to find a way by which the minds of men, the hopes of men, thesouls of men everywhere, can move forward toward peace and happiness andwell-being. In thisquest, I know that we must not lack patience. I know that in a world divided,such as ours today, salvation cannot be attained by one dramatic act.I know that many steps will have to be taken over many months before theworld can look at itself one day and truly realize that a new climate ofmutually peaceful confidence is abroad in the world. But I know, above all else,that we must start to take these steps now. The UnitedStates and its allies, Great Britain and France, have, over the past months,tried to take some of these steps. Let no one say that we shun the conferencetable. On the record has long stood the request of the United States, Great Britain, and France to negotiate with the Soviet Union the problems of adivided Germany. On that record has long stood the request of the same threenations to negotiate an Austrian peace treaty. On the same record still standsthe request of the United Nations to negotiate the problems of Korea. Mostrecently we have received from the Soviet Union what is in effect an expressionof willingness to hold a four-Power meeting. Along with our allies, GreatBritain and France, we were pleased to see that his note did not contain theunacceptable pre-conditions previously put forward. As you already know from ourjoint Bermuda communiqu, the United States, Great Britain, and France haveagreed promptly to meet with the Soviet Union. TheGovernment of the United States approaches this conference with hopefulsincerity. We will bend every effort of our minds to the single purpose ofemerging from that conference with tangible results towards peace, the only trueway of lessening international tension. We never have, we never will, proposeor suggest that the Soviet Union surrender what is rightfully theirs. We will neversay that the people of Russia are an enemy with whom we have no desire everto deal or mingle in friendly and fruitful relationship. On thecontrary, we hope that this coming conference may initiate a relationship withthe Soviet Union which will eventually bring about a free intermingling of thepeoples of the East and of the West -- the one sure, human way of developing theunderstanding required for confident and peaceful relations. Instead ofthe discontent which is now settling upon Eastern Germany, occupied Austria, andthe countries of Eastern Europe, we seek a harmonious family of free Europeannations, with none a threat to the other, and least of all a threat to thepeoples of the Russia. Beyond the turmoil and strife and misery of Asia, we seekpeaceful opportunity for these peoples to develop their natural resources and toelevate their lives. These arenot idle words or shallow visions. Behind them lies a story of nations latelycome to independence, not as a result of war, but through free grant or peacefulnegotiation. There is a record already written of assistance gladly given bynations of the West to needy peoples and to those suffering the temporaryeffects of famine, drought, and natural disaster. These are deeds of peace. Theyspeak more loudly than promises or protestations of peaceful intent. But I donot wish to rest either upon the reiteration of past proposals or therestatement of past deeds. The gravity of the time is such that every new avenueof peace, no matter how dimly discernible, should be explored. There is at leastone new avenue of peace which has not yet been well explored -- an avenue now laidout by the General Assembly of the Unites Nations. In itsresolution of November 18th, 1953 this General Assembly suggested -- and I quote --that the Disarmament Commission study the desirability of establishing a sub-committee consisting of representatives of the Powers principally involved,which should seek in private an acceptable solution and report such asolution to the General Assembly and to the Security Council not later thanSeptember 1, of 1954. The UnitedStates, heeding the suggestion of the General Assembly of the United Nations, isinstantly prepared to meet privately with such other countries as may beprincipally involved, to seek an acceptable solution to the atomicarmaments race which overshadows not only the peace, but the very life of theworld. We shall carry into these private or diplomatic talks a new conception. The UnitedStates would seek more than the mere reduction or elimination of atomicmaterials for military purposes. It is not enough to take this weapon out of thehands of the soldiers. It must be put into the hands of those who will know howto strip its military casing and adapt it to the arts of peace. The UnitedStates knows that if the fearful trend of atomic military build-up can bereversed, this greatest of destructive forces can be developed into a greatboon, for the benefit of all mankind. The United States knows that peacefulpower from atomic energy is no dream of the future. That capability, alreadyproved, is here, now, today. Who can doubt, if the entire body of theworlds scientists and engineers had adequate amounts of fissionable materialwith which to test and develop their ideas, that this capability would rapidly betransformed into universal, efficient, and economic usage? To hastenthe day when fear of the atom will begin to disappear from the minds of peopleand the governments of the East and West, there are certain steps that can betaken now. I therefore make the following proposals: Thegovernments principally involved, to the extent permitted by elementaryprudence, to begin now and continue to make joint contributions from theirstockpiles of normal uranium and fissionable materials to an InternationalAtomic Energy Agency. We would expect that such an agency would be set up underthe aegis of the United Nations.  The ratios of contributions, the procedures, andother details would properly be within the scope of the privateconversations I have referred to earlier. The United States is prepared to undertake these explorations in good faith. Any partner of the United States acting in the same good faith will find the United States a not unreasonable or ungenerous associate. Undoubtedly, initial and early contributions to this plan would be small in quantity. However, the proposal has the great virtue that it can be undertaken without the irritations and mutual suspicions incident to any attempt to set up a completely acceptable system of world-wide inspection and control. The AtomicEnergy Agency could be made responsible for the impounding, storage, andprotection of the contributed fissionable and other materials. The ingenuity ofour scientists will provide special, safe conditions under which such a bank offissionable material can be made essentially immune to surprise seizure. The moreimportant responsibility of this Atomic Energy Agency would be to devise methodswhereby this fissionable material would be allocated to serve the peacefulpursuits of mankind. Experts would be mobilized to apply atomic energy to theneeds of agriculture, medicine, and other peaceful activities. A special purposewould be to provide abundant electrical energy in the power-starved areas of theworld. Thus the contributing Powers would be dedicating some of their strength to serve the needs rather than the fears of mankind. The United States would be more than willing -- it would be proud to take up with others principally involved the development of plans whereby such peaceful use of atomic energy would be expedited. Of thoseprincipally involved the Soviet Union must, of course, be one. I would beprepared to submit to the Congress of the United States, and with everyexpectation of approval, any such plan that would, first, encourage world-wideinvestigation into the most effective peacetime uses of fissionable material,and with the certainty that they [the investigators] had all the material needed for the conduct of all experiments that were appropriate; second, begin to diminish the potential destructive power of the worlds atomic stockpiles; third, allow all peoples of all nations to see that, in this enlightened age, the great Powers of the earth, both of the East and of the West, are interested in human aspirations first rather than in building up the armaments of war; fourth, open up a new channel for peaceful discussion and initiate at least a new approachto the many difficult problems that must be solved in both private and publicconversations, if the world is to shake off the inertia imposed by fear and is tomake positive progress toward peace. Againstthe dark background of the atomic bomb, the United States does not wish merelyto present strength, but also the desire and the hope for peace. The comingmonths will be fraught with fateful decisions. In this Assembly, in the capitalsand military headquarters of the world, in the hearts of men everywhere, be theygoverned or governors, may they be the decisions which will lead this world out offear and into peace. To the making of these fateful decisions, the United Statespledges before you, and therefore before the world, its determination to helpsolvethe fearful atomic dilemma --to devote its entire heart and mind to find the way by which the miraculousinventiveness of man shall not be dedicated to his death, but consecrated to hislife. I againthank the delegates for the great honor they have done me in inviting me toappear before them and in listening me -- to me so courteously. Thank you.   * = text within asterisks absent from this audio Also in this database: Dwight D. Eisenhower - Farewell Address Audio Source: The Mills Center for Public Affairs --Scripps Library and Multimedia Archive Image Source: Unknown U.S. Copyright Status: 