[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly from audio. (2)] [AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly from audio. (2)] Mr. President, fellow delegates: The long and meticulous study and debate of which this UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights is the product means that it reflects the composite views ofthe many men and governments who have contributed to its formulation. Not every man norevery government can have what he wants in a document of this kind. There are of courseparticular provisions in the Declaration before us with which we are not fully satisfied.I have no doubt this is true of other delegations, and it would still be true if we continued our labors over many years. Taken as a whole the Delegation ofthe United States believes that this is a good document -- even a great document -- and wepropose to give it our full support. The position of the United States on the variousparts of the Declaration is a matter of record in the Third Committee. I shall not burdenthe Assembly, and particularly my colleagues of the Third Committee, with a restatement ofthat position here. I should like to comment briefly on the amendments proposed by the Soviet delegation. The language of these amendments has been dressed up somewhat, but the substance is the same as the amendments which were offered by the Soviet delegation in committee and rejected after exhaustive discussion. Substantially the same amendments have been previously considered and rejected in the Human Rights Commission. We in the United States admire those who fight for their convictions, and the Soviet delegation has fought for their convictions. But in the older democracies we have learned that sometimes we bow to the will of the majority. In doing that, we do not give up our convictions. We continue sometimes to persuade, and eventually we may be successful. But we know that we have to work together and we have to progress. So, we believe that when we have made a good fight, and the majority is against us, it is perhaps better tactics to try to cooperate.  I feel bound to say that I think perhaps it is somewhat of an imposition on this Assembly to have these amendments offered again here, and I am confident that they will be rejected without debate.  The first two paragraphs of the amendment to article 3 deal with the question of minorities, which committee 3 decided required further study, and has recommended, in a separate resolution, their reference to the Economic and Social Council and the Human Rights Commission. As set out in the Soviet amendment, this provision clearly states "group," and not "individual," rights.  The Soviet amendment to article 20 is obviously a very restrictive statement of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. It sets up standards which would enable any state practically to deny all freedom of opinion and expression without violating the article. It introduces the terms "democratic view," "democratic systems," "democratic state," and "fascism," which we know all too well from debates in this Assembly over the past two years on warmongering and related subjects are liable to the most flagrant abuse and diverse interpretations. The statement of the Soviet delegate here tonight is a very good case in point on this. The Soviet amendment of article 22 introduces new elements into the article without improving the committed text and again introduces specific reference to "discrimination." As was repeatedly pointed out in committee 3, the question of discrimination is comprehensively covered in article 2 of the Declaration, so that its restatement elsewhere is completely unnecessary and also has the effect of weakening the comprehensive principles stated in article 2. The new article proposed by the Soviet delegation is but a restatement of State obligation, which the Soviet delegation attempted to introduce into practically every article in the Declaration. It would convert the Declaration into a document stating obligations on states, thereby changing completely its character as a statement of principles to serve as a common standard of achievement for the members of the United Nations. The Soviet proposal for deferring consideration of the Declaration to the 4th session of the Assembly requires no comment. An identical text was rejected in committee 3 by a vote of 6 in favor and 26 against. We are all agreed, I am sure, that the Declaration, which has been worked on with such great effort and devotion, and over such a long period of time, must be approved by this Assembly at this session. Certain provisions of the Declaration are stated in such broad termsas to be acceptable only because of the provisions in article 30 providing for limitationon the exercise of the rights for the purpose of meeting the requirements of morality,public order, and the general welfare. An example of this is the provision that everyonehas the right to equal access to the public service in his country. The basic principle ofequality and of nondiscrimination as to public employment is sound, but it cannot beaccepted without limitation. My government, for example, would consider that this isunquestionably subject to limitation in the interest of public order and the generalwelfare. It would not consider that the exclusion from public employment of personsholding subversive political beliefs and not loyal to the basic principles and practicesof the constitution and laws of the country would in any way infringe upon this right. Likewise, my government has made it clear in the course of thedevelopment of the Declaration that it does not consider that the economic and social andcultural rights stated in the Declaration imply an obligation on governments to assure the enjoyment of these rights by direct governmental action. Thiswas made quite clear in the Human Rights Commission text of article 23 which served as aso-called "umbrella" article to the articles on economic and social rights. Weconsider that the principle has not been affected by the fact that this article no longercontains a reference to the articles which follow it. This in no way affects ourwhole-hearted support for the basic principles of economic, social, and cultural rightsset forth in these articles. In giving our approval to the Declaration today it is of primaryimportance that we keep clearly in mind the basic character of the document. It is not atreaty; it is not an international agreement. It is not and does not purport to be astatement of law or of legal obligation. It is a Declaration of basicprinciples of human rights and freedoms, to be stamped with the approval of the GeneralAssembly by formal vote of its members, and to serve as a common standard of achievementfor all peoples of all nations. We stand today at the threshold of a great event both in the life ofthe United Nations and in the life of mankind. This Universal Declaration of Human Rights may well become the international Magna Carta of all men everywhere. Wehope its proclamation by the General Assembly will be an event comparable to theproclamation of the Declaration of the Rights of Man by the French people in 1789, theadoption of the Bill of Rights by the people of the United States, and the adoption ofcomparable declarations at different times in other countries. At a time when there are so many issues on which we find itdifficult to reach a common basis of agreement, it is a significant fact that 58 stateshave found such a large measure of agreement in the complex field of human rights. Thismust be taken as testimony of our common aspiration first voiced in the Charter of theUnited Nations to lift men everywhere to a higher standard of life and to a greaterenjoyment of freedom. Mans desire for peace lies behind this Declaration. Therealization that the flagrant violation of human rights by Nazi and Fascist countriessowed the seeds of the last world war has supplied the impetus for the work which bringsus to the moment of achievement here today. In a recent speech in Canada, Gladstone Murray said: The central fact is that man isfundamentally a moral being, that thelight we have is imperfect does not matter so long as we are alwaystrying to improve it  we are equal in sharing the moral freedomthatdistinguishes us as men. Mans status makes each individual an endinhimself. No man is by nature simply the servant of the state or ofanother man  the ideal and fact of freedom -- and not technology -- are the true distinguishing marks of our civilization.  This Declaration is based upon the spiritual fact that man must havefreedom in which to develop his full stature and through common effort to raise the levelof human dignity. We have much to do to fully achieve and to assure the rights set forthin this Declaration. But having them put before us with the moral backing of 58 nationswill be a great step forward. As we here bring to fruition our labors on this Declaration of HumanRights, we must at the same time rededicate ourselves to the unfinished task which liesbefore us. We can now move on with new courage and inspiration to the completion of aninternational covenant on human rights and of measures for the implementation of humanrights. In conclusion, I feel that I cannot do better than to repeat the callto action by Secretary Marshall in his opening statement to this Assembly:  Let this third regular session of the General Assembly approve by anoverwhelming majority the Declaration of Human Rights as astandard of conduct for all; and let us, as Members of the UnitedNations, conscious of our own short-comings and imperfections, joinour effort in good faith to live up to this high standard.   Also in this database:Eleanor Roosevelt: "The Struggle for Human Rights" More Information:http://www.udhr.org/ Audio & Image #2 Source: The Franklin Delano Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum Copyright Status: 