[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly from audio. (2)] I'm Elizabeth Glaser. Eleven years ago, while giving birth to myfirst child, I hemorrhaged and was transfused with seven pints of blood. Four years later,I found out that I had been infected with the AIDS virus and had unknowingly passed it to my daughter, Ariel, through my breast milk, and my son, Jake, in utero. Twenty years ago I wanted to be at the Democratic Convention becauseit was a way to participate in my country. Today, I am here because it's a matter of lifeand death. Exactly -- Exactly four years ago my daughter died of AIDS. She did not survive the ReaganAdministration. I am here because my son and I may not survive four more years of leaderswho say they care, but do nothing. I -- I am in a race with the clock. This is not about beinga Republican or an Independent or a Democrat. It's about the future -- for each and everyone of us. I started out just a mom -- fighting for the life of her child. Butalong the way I learned how unfair America can be today, not just for people who have HIV,but for many, many people -- poor people, gay people, people of color, children. A strange spokespersonfor such a group: a well-to-do white woman. But I have learned my lesson the hard way,and I know that America has lost her path and is at risk of losing her soul. America wakeup: We are all in a struggle between life and death. I understand -- I understand the sense of frustration and despair in our country,because I know firsthand about shouting for help and getting no answer. I went toWashington to tell Presidents Reagan and Bush that much, much more had to be done for AIDS research and care, and that children couldn't be forgotten. The first time, when nothing happened, I thought, "They just didn't hear me." The second time, when nothing happened, Ithought, "Maybe I didn't shout loud enough." But now I realize they don't hear becausethey don't want to listen. When you cry for help and no one listens, you start to loseyour hope. I began to lose faith in America. I felt my country was lettingme down -- and it was. This is not the America I was raised to be proud of. I was raised tobelieve that other's problems were my problems as well. But when I tell most people aboutHIV, in hopes that they will help and care, I see the look in their eyes: "It's not myproblem," they're thinking. Well, it's everyone's problem and we need a leader who will tellus that. We need a visionary to guide us -- to say it wasn't all right for Ryan White to be banned from school because he had AIDS, to say it wasn't alright for a man or a woman to be denied a job becausethey're infected with this virus. We need a leader who is truly committed to educatingus. I believe in America, but not with a leadership of selfishness andgreed -- where the wealthy get health care and insurance and the poor don't. Do you know -- Do you know howmuch my AIDS care costs? Over 40,000 dollars a year. Someone without insurance can't affordthis. Even the drugs that I hope will keep me alive are out of reach for others. Is theirlife any less valuable? Of course not. This is not the America I was raised to be proudof -- where rich people get care and drugs that poor people can't. We need health carefor all. We need a leader who will say this and do something about it. I believe in America, but not a leadership that talks aboutproblems but is incapable of solving them -- two HIV commission reports with recommendationsabout what to do to solve this crisis sitting on shelves, gathering dust. We need aleader who will not only listen to these recommendations, but implement them. I believe in America, but not with a leadership that doesn't holdgovernment accountable. I go to Washington to the National Institutes of Health and say,"Show me what you're doing on HIV." They hate it when I come because I try totell them how to do it better. But that's why I love being a taxpayer, because it's mymoney and they must feel accountable. I believe in an America where our leaders talk straight. When anyonetells President Bush that the battle against AIDS is seriously under-funded, he jugglesthe numbers to mislead the public into thinking we're spending twice as much as we reallyare. While they play games with numbers, people are dying. I believe in America, but an America where there is a light in everyhome. A thousand points of light just wasn't enough: My house has been dark for toolong. Once every generation, history brings us to an important crossroads.Sometimes in life there is that moment when it's possible to make a change for the better.This is one of those moments. For me, this is not politics. This is a crisis of caring. In this hall is the future -- women, men of all colors saying, "TakeAmerica back." We are -- We are just real people wanting a more hopeful life. But words and ideas arenot enough. Good thoughts won't save my family. What's the point of caring if we don't dosomething about it? A President and a Congress that can work togetherso we can get out of this gridlock and move ahead, because I don't win my war if the President cares and the Congress, or if the Congress cares and the President doesn't support the ideas. The people in this hall this week, the Democratic Party, all of uscan begin to deliver that partnership, and in November we can all bring it home. My daughter lived seven years, and in her last year, when shecouldn't walk or talk, her wisdom shone through. She taught me to love, when all Iwanted to do was hate. She taught me to help others, when all I wanted to do was helpmyself. She taught me to be brave, when all I felt was fear.My daughter and I lovedeach other with simplicity. America, we can do the same. This was the country that offered hope. This was the place wheredreams could come true, not just economic dreams, but dreams of freedom, justice, andequality. We all need to hope that our dreams can come true. I challenge you to make ithappen, because all our lives, not just mine, depend on it. Thank you.  Mary Fisher -- 1992 Republican National Convention Address Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric Foundation Text, Image = Uncertain.