[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio.] My friends:  This is not a fireside chat on war. It is a talk on national security;becausethe nub of the whole purpose of your President is to keep you now, andyour childrenlater, and your grandchildren much later, out of a last-ditch war for thepreservation ofAmerican independence, and all of the things that American independencemeans toyou and to me and to ours. Tonight, in the presence of a world crisis, my mind goes back eight yearsto a night inthe midst of a domestic crisis. It was a time when the wheels of Americanindustrywere grinding to a full stop, when the whole banking system of our countryhad ceasedto function.I well remember that while I sat in my study in the White House, preparingto talk withthe people of the United States, I had before my eyes the picture of allthoseAmericans with whom I was talking. I saw the workmen in the mills, themines, thefactories, the girl behind the counter, the small shopkeeper, the farmerdoing hisspring plowing, the widows and the old men wondering about their life'ssavings. I tried to convey to the great mass of American people what the banking crisismeant tothem in their daily lives. Tonight, I want to do the same thing, with the same people, in this newcrisis whichfaces America.We met the issue of 1933 with courage and realism. We face this new crisis, this newthreat to the security of our nation, with the same courage and realism.Never beforesince Jamestown and Plymouth Rock has our American civilization been insuchdanger as now.For on September 27th, 1940 -- this year -- by an agreement signed in Berlin,threepowerful nations, two in Europe and one in Asia, joined themselves togetherin thethreat that if the United States of America interfered with or blockedthe expansion program of these three nations -- a program aimed at world control       -- theywould unite inultimate action against the United States. The Nazi masters of Germany have made it clear that they intend not onlyto dominateall life and thought in their own country, but also to enslave the wholeof Europe, andthen to use the resources of Europe to dominate the rest of the world.It was only threeweeks ago that their leader stated this: "There are two worlds that standopposed toeach other." And then in defiant reply to his opponents he said this: "Othersare correct when they say: 'With this world we cannot ever reconcile       ourselves.'''I canbeat any other power in the world." So said the leader of the Nazis. In other words, the Axis not merely admits but the Axis proclaims thatthere can be noultimate peace between their philosophy -- their philosophy of government      -- and ourphilosophy of government.In view of the nature of this undeniable threat, it can be asserted, properlyandcategorically, that the United States has no right or reason to encouragetalk of peaceuntil the day shall come when there is a clear intention on the part ofthe aggressornations to abandon all thought of dominating or conquering the world. At this moment the forces of the States that are leagued against all peopleswho live infreedom are being held away from our shores. The Germans and the Italiansarebeing blocked on the other side of the Atlantic by the British and by theGreeks, and bythousands of soldiers and sailors who were able to escape from subjugatedcountries.In Asia the Japanese are being engaged by the Chinese nation in anothergreatdefense.In the Pacific Ocean is our fleet. Some of our people like to believe that wars in Europe and in Asia areof no concernto us. But it is a matter of most vital concern to us that European andAsiaticwar-makers should not gain control of the oceans which lead to this hemisphere.       One hundred and seventeen years ago the Monroe Doctrine was conceived byourgovernment as a measure of defense in the face of a threat against thishemisphereby an alliance in Continental Europe. Thereafter, we stood guard in theAtlantic, withthe British as neighbors. There was no treaty. There was no "unwrittenagreement." And yet there was the feeling, proven correct by history, that we as neighborscouldsettle any disputes in peaceful fashion. And the fact is that during thewhole of this timethe Western Hemisphere has remained free from aggression from Europe orfromAsia. Does anyone seriously believe that we need to fear attack anywhere in theAmericaswhile a free Britain remains our most powerful naval neighbor in the Atlantic?Anddoes anyone seriously believe, on the other hand, that we could rest easyif the Axispowers were our neighbors there?If Great Britain goes down, the Axis powers will control the Continentsof Europe, Asia,Africa, Austral-Asia, and the high seas. And they will be in a positionto bring enormousmilitary and naval resources against this hemisphere. It is no exaggerationto say thatall of us in all the Americas would be living at the point of a gun -- agun loaded withexplosive bullets, economic as well as military.We should enter upon a new and terrible era in which the whole world, ourhemisphereincluded, would be run by threats of brute force. And to survive in sucha world, wewould have to convert ourselves permanently into a militaristic power onthe basis ofwar economy. Some of us like to believe that even if Britain falls, we are still safe,because of thebroad expanse of the Atlantic and of the Pacific.But the width of those oceans is not what it was in the days of clipperships. At onepoint between Africa and Brazil the distance is less than it is from WashingtontoDenver, Colorado, five hours for the latest type of bomber. And at thenorth end of thePacific Ocean, America and Asia almost touch each other. Why, even todaywe haveplanes that could fly from the British Isles to New England and back againwithoutrefueling. And remember that the range of the modern bomber is ever beingincreased. During the past week many people in all parts of the nation have told mewhat theywanted me to say tonight. Almost all of them expressed a courageous desireto hearthe plain truth about the gravity of the situation. One telegram, however,expressed theattitude of the small minority who want to see no evil and hear no evil,even though theyknow in their hearts that evil exists. That telegram begged me not to tellagain of theease with which our American cities could be bombed by any hostile powerwhich hadgained bases in this Western Hemisphere. The gist of that telegram was:"Please, Mr.President, don't frighten us by telling us the facts." Frankly and definitelythere isdanger ahead -- danger against which we must prepare. But we well know thatwecannot escape danger, or the fear of danger, by crawling into bed and pullingthecovers over our heads. Some nations of Europe were bound by solemn nonintervention pacts withGermany. Other nations were assured by Germany that they need never fear invasion.Nonintervention pact or not, the fact remains that they were attacked,overrun, throwninto modern slavery at an hour's notice -- or even without any notice at all.As an exiled leader of one of these nations said to me the other day, "Thenotice was aminus quantity. It was given to my government two hours after German troopshadpoured into my country in a hundred places." The fate of these nationstells us what itmeans to live at the point of a Nazi gun. The Nazis have justified such actions by various pious frauds. One of thesefrauds isthe claim that they are occupying a nation for the purpose of "restoringorder." Anotheris that they are occupying or controlling a nation on the excuse that theyare "protectingit" against the aggression of somebody else.For example, Germany has said that she was occupying Belgium to save theBelgiansfrom the British. Would she then hesitate to say to any South Americancountry: "Weare occupying you to protect you from aggression by the United States"?Belgium today is being used as an invasion base against Britain, now fightingfor itslife. And any South American country, in Nazi hands, would always constituteajumping off place for German attack on any one of the other republics ofthis hemisphere. Analyze for yourselves the future of two other places even nearer to Germanyif theNazis won. Could Ireland hold out? Would Irish freedom be permitted asan amazingpet exception in an unfree world? Or the islands of the Azores, which stillfly the flag ofPortugal after five centuries? You and I think of Hawaii as an outpostof defense in thePacific. And yet the Azores are closer to our shores in the Atlantic thanHawaii is onthe other side. There are those who say that the Axis powers would never have any desireto attackthe Western Hemisphere. That is the same dangerous form of wishful thinkingwhichhas destroyed the powers of resistance of so many conquered peoples. Theplainfacts are that the Nazis have proclaimed, time and again, that all otherraces are theirinferiors and therefore subject to their orders. And most important ofall, the vastresources and wealth of this American hemisphere constitute the most temptingloot inall of the round world. Let us no longer blind ourselves to the undeniable fact that the evil forceswhich havecrushed and undermined and corrupted so many others are already withinour owngates. Your government knows much about them and every day is ferretingthem out.Their secret emissaries are active in our own and in neighboring countries.They seekto stir up suspicion and dissension, to cause internal strife. They tryto turn capitalagainst labor, and vice versa. They try to reawaken long slumbering racialand religious enmities which should have no place in this country. They areactive in everygroup that promotes intolerance. They exploit for their own ends our ownnaturalabhorrence of war.These trouble-breeders have but one purpose. It is to divide our people,to dividethem into hostile groups and to destroy our unity and shatter our willto defendourselves. There are also American citizens, many of them in high places, who, unwittinglyinmost cases, are aiding and abetting the work of these agents. I do notcharge theseAmerican citizens with being foreign agents. But I do charge them withdoing exactly the kind of work that the dictators want done in the United States. Thesepeople notonly believe that we can save our own skins by shutting our eyes to thefate of othernations. Some of them go much further than that. They say that we can andshouldbecome the friends and even the partners of the Axis powers. Some of themevensuggest that we should imitate the methods of the dictatorships. But Americansnevercan and never will do that. The experience of the past two years has proven beyond doubt that no nationcanappease the Nazis. No man can tame a tiger into a kitten by stroking it.There can beno appeasement with ruthlessness. There can be no reasoning with an incendiary bomb. We know now that a nation can have peace with the Nazis only at theprice oftotal surrender.Even the people of Italy have been forced to become accomplices of theNazis; but atthis moment they do not know how soon they will be embraced to death bytheir allies. The American appeasers ignore the warning to be found in the fate of Austria,Czechoslovakia, Poland, Norway, Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, andFrance.They tell you that the Axis powers are going to win anyway; that all ofthis bloodshed inthe world could be saved, that the United States might just as well throwits influenceinto the scale of a dictated peace and get the best out of it that we can.They call it a "negotiated peace." Nonsense! Is it a negotiated peace ifa gang ofoutlaws surrounds your community and on threat of extermination makes youpaytribute to save your own skins?For such a dictated peace would be no peace at all. It would be only anotherarmistice,leading to the most gigantic armament race and the most devastating tradewars in allhistory. And in these contests the Americas would offer the only real resistanceto theAxis power. With all their vaunted efficiency, with all their parade ofpious purpose inthis war, there are still in their background the concentration camp andthe servants ofGod in chains. The history of recent years proves that the shootings and the chains andtheconcentration camps are not simply the transient tools but the very altarsof moderndictatorships. They may talk of a "new order" in the world, but what theyhave in mindis only a revival of the oldest and the worst tyranny. In that there isno liberty, no religion, nohope. The proposed "new order" is the very opposite of a United States of Europeor aUnited States of Asia. It is not a government based upon the consent ofthe governed.It is not a union of ordinary, self-respecting men and women to protectthemselves andtheir freedom and their dignity from oppression. It is an unholy allianceof power andpelf to dominate and to enslave the human race. The British people and their allies today are conducting an active waragainst thisunholy alliance. Our own future security is greatly dependent on the outcomeof thatfight. Our ability to "keep out of war" is going to be affected by thatoutcome. Thinking in terms of today and tomorrow, I make the direct statement tothe Americanpeople that there is far less chance of the United States getting intowar if we do all wecan now to support the nations defending themselves against attack by theAxis than ifwe acquiesce in their defeat, submit tamely to an Axis victory, and waitour turn to bethe object of attack in another war later on.  If we are to be completely honest with ourselves, we must admit that thereis risk in anycourse we may take. But I deeply believe that the great majority of ourpeople agreethat the course that I advocate involves the least risk now and the greatesthope for world peace in the future. The people of Europe who are defending themselves do not ask us to do their       fighting. They ask us for the implements of war, the planes, the tanks,the guns, thefreighters which will enable them to fight for their liberty and for oursecurity.Emphatically, we must get these weapons to them, get them to them in sufficientvolume and quickly enough so that we and our children will be saved theagony andsuffering of war which others have had to endure. Let not the defeatists tell us that it is too late. It will never be earlier.Tomorrow will belater than today.  Certain facts are self-evident.  In a military sense Great Britain and the British Empire are today thespearhead ofresistance to world conquest. And they are putting up a fight which willlive forever inthe story of human gallantry.There is no demand for sending an American expeditionary force outsideour ownborders. There is no intention by any member of your government to sendsuch aforce. You can therefore, nail, nail any talk about sending armies to Europeasdeliberate untruth.Our national policy is not directed toward war. Its sole purpose is tokeep war awayfrom our country and away from our people. Democracy's fight against world conquest is being greatly aided, and mustbe moregreatly aided, by the rearmament of the United States and by sending everyounceand every ton of munitions and supplies that we can possibly spare to helpthedefenders who are in the front lines. And it is no more un-neutral for usto do that than itis for Sweden, Russia, and other nations near Germany to send steel andore and oiland other war materials into Germany every day in the week. We are planning our own defense with the utmost urgency, and in its vastscale we must integrate the war needs of Britain and the other free nations whichare resistingaggression.This is not a matter of sentiment or of controversial personal opinion.It is a matter ofrealistic, practical military policy, based on the advice of our militaryexperts who arein close touch with existing warfare. These military and naval expertsand themembers of the Congress and the Administration have a single-minded purpose: thedefense of the United States.  This nation is making a great effort to produce everything that is necessaryin thisemergency, and with all possible speed. And this great effort requiresgreat sacrifice.I would ask no one to defend a democracy which in turn would not defendevery one in the nation against want and privation. The strength of this nation shallnot be diluted bythe failure of the government to protect the economic well-being of itscitizens. If our capacity to produce is limited by machines, it must ever be rememberedthatthese machines are operated by the skill and the stamina of the workers. As thegovernment is determined to protect the rights of the workers, so the nationhas a rightto expect that the men who man the machines will discharge their full responsibilitiesto the urgent needs of defense.The worker possesses the same human dignity and is entitled to the samesecurity ofposition as the engineer or the manager or the owner. For the workers providethehuman power that turns out the destroyers, and the planes, and the tanks.The nation expects our defense industries to continue operation withoutinterruption bystrikes or lockouts. It expects and insists that management and workerswill reconciletheir differences by voluntary or legal means, to continue to produce thesupplies thatare so sorely needed.And on the economic side of our great defense program, we are, as you know,bending every effort to maintain stability of prices and with that thestability of the cost of living. Nine days ago I announced the setting up of a more effective organizationto direct ourgigantic efforts to increase the production of munitions. The appropriationof vastsums of money and a well-coordinated executive direction of our defenseefforts arenot in themselves enough. Guns, planes, ships and many other things haveto be builtin the factories and the arsenals of America. They have to be producedby workersand managers and engineers with the aid of machines which in turn haveto be built byhundreds of thousands of workers throughout the land.In this great work there has been splendid cooperation between the governmentandindustry and labor. And I am very thankful. American industrial genius, unmatched throughout all the world in the solutionofproduction problems, has been called upon to bring its resources and itstalents intoaction. Manufacturers of watches, of farm implements, of Linotypes andcash registersand automobiles, and sewing machines and lawn mowers and locomotives, arenowmaking fuses and bomb packing crates and telescope mounts and shells andpistolsand tanks. But all of our present efforts are not enough. We must have more ships,more guns,more planes -- more of everything. And this can be accomplished only ifwe discard thenotion of "business as usual." This job cannot be done merely by superimposingonthe existing productive facilities the added requirements of the nationfor defense.Our defense efforts must not be blocked by those who fear the future consequencesofsurplus plant capacity. The possible consequences of failure of our defenseeffortsnow are much more to be feared.And after the present needs of our defense are past, a proper handlingof the country's peacetime needs will require all of the new productive capacity, if notstill more.No pessimistic policy about the future of America shall delay the immediateexpansionof those industries essential to defense. We need them. I want to make it clear that it is the purpose of the nation to build nowwith all possiblespeed every machine, every arsenal, every factory that we need to manufactureourdefense material. We have the men, the skill, the wealth, and above all, thewill.I am confident that if and when production of consumer or luxury goodsin certainindustries requires the use of machines and raw materials that are essentialfordefense purposes, then such production must yield, and will gladly yield,to our primaryand compelling purpose. So I appeal to the owners of plants, to the managers, to the workers, to our owngovernment employees to put every ounce of effort into producing thesemunitionsswiftly and without stint. With this appeal I give you the pledge thatall of us who are officers of your government will devote ourselves to the same whole-heartedextent tothe great task that lies ahead. As planes and ships and guns and shells are produced, your government, withitsdefense experts, can then determine how best to use them to defend thishemisphere.The decision as to how much shall be sent abroad and how much shall remainathome must be made on the basis of our overall military necessities. We must be the great arsenal of democracy.  For us this is an emergency as seriousas war itself. We must apply ourselves to our task with the same resolution,the samesense of urgency, the same spirit of patriotism and sacrifice as we wouldshow werewe at war. We have furnished the British great material support and we will furnishfar more in thefuture.There will be no "bottlenecks" in our determination to aid Great Britain.No dictator, nocombination of dictators, will weaken that determination by threats ofhow they willconstrue that determination.The British have received invaluable military support from the heroic GreekArmy andfrom the forces of all the governments in exile. Their strength is growing.It is thestrength of men and women who value their freedom more highly than theyvalue theirlives. I believe that the Axis powers are not going       to win this war. I base that belief on the latest and best of information. We have no excuse for defeatism. We have every good reason for hope       -- hopeforpeace, yes, and hope for the defense of our civilization and for the buildingof a bettercivilization in the future.I have the profound conviction that the American people are now determinedto putforth a mightier effort than they have ever yet made to increase our productionof all theimplements of defense, to meet the threat to our democratic faith. As President of the United States, I call for that national effort. I callfor it in the name ofthis nation which we love and honor and which we are privileged and proudto serve. Icall upon our people with absolute confidence that our common cause willgreatlysucceed.  Also       in this database: Franklin Delano Roosevelt "Pearl Harbor Address to the       Nation" Copyright Status:  