[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio.] Mr. President, Dr. Conant, members of the Board of Overseers, Ladiesand Gentlemen:  I am profoundly grateful, touched by the great distinction and honorand great compliment accorded me by the authorities of Harvard this morning.I am overwhelmed, as a matter of fact, and I am rather fearful of my inabilityto maintain such a high rating as you've been generous enough to accordto me. In these historic and lovely surroundings, this perfect day, and this very wonderfulassembly, it is a tremendously impressive thing to an individual in myposition. But to speak more seriously, I need not tell you that the world situationis very serious. That must be apparent to all intelligent people. I thinkone difficulty is that the problem is one of such enormous complexity that the very mass of factspresented to the public by press and radio make it exceedingly difficultfor the man in the street to reach a clear appraisement of the situation. Furthermore,the people of this country are distant from the troubled areas of the earth,and it is hard for them to comprehend the plight and consequent reactionsof the long-suffering peoples of Europe and the effect of those reactionson their governments in connection with our efforts to promote peace inthe world. In considering the requirements for the rehabilitation of Europe, thephysical loss of life, the visible destruction of cities, factories, mines,and railroads was correctly estimated, but it has become obvious during recent months that thisvisible destruction was probably less serious than the dislocation of theentire fabric of European economy. For the past ten years conditions have been highly abnormal.The feverish preparation for war and the more feverish maintenance of thewar effort engulfed all aspects of national economies. Machinery has falleninto disrepair or is entirely obsolete. Under the arbitrary and destructiveNazi rule, virtually every possible enterprise was geared into the Germanwar machine. Long-standing commercial ties, private institutions, banks,insurance companies, and shipping companies disappeared through loss ofcapital, absorption through nationalization, or by simple destruction.In many countries, confidence in the local currency has been severely shaken.The breakdown of the business structure of Europe during the war was complete.Recovery has been seriously retarded by the fact that two years after theclose of hostilities a peace settlement with Germany and Austria has notbeen agreed upon. But even given a more prompt solution of these difficult problems, the rehabilitation of the economic structure of Europe quiteevidently will require a much longer time and greater effort than had beenforeseen. There is a phase of this matter which is both interesting and serious.The farmer has always produced the foodstuffs to exchange with the citydweller for the other necessities of life. This division of labor is the basis of moderncivilization. At the present time it is threatened with breakdown. Thetown and city industries are not producing adequate goods to exchange with the food-producing farmer.Raw materials and fuel are in short supply. Machinery, as I have said,is lacking or worn out. The farmer or the peasant cannot find the goodsfor sale which he desires to purchase. So the sale of his farm producefor money which he cannot use seems to him an unprofitable transaction.He, therefore, has withdrawn many fields from crop cultivation and he'susing them for grazing. He feeds more grain to stock and finds for himselfand his family an ample supply of food, however short he may be on clothingand the other ordinary gadgets of civilization. Meanwhile, people in the cities are short of food and fuel, and in someplaces approaching the starvation levels. So, the governments are forcedto use their foreign money and credits to procure these necessities abroad.This process exhausts funds which are urgently needed for reconstruction.Thus, a very serious situation is rapidly developing which bodes no goodfor the world. The modern system of the division of labor upon which theexchange of products is based is in danger of breaking down. The truthof the matter is that Europe's requirements for the next three or fouryears of foreign food and other essential products -- principally fromAmerica -- are so much greater than her present ability to pay that shemust have substantial additional help or face economic, social, and politicaldeterioration of a very grave character.  The remedy seems to lie in breaking the vicious circle and restoringthe confidence of the people of Europe in the economic future of theirown countries and of Europe as a whole. The manufacturer and the farmerthroughout wide areas must be able and willing to exchange their productfor currencies, the continuing value of which is not open to question. Aside from the demoralizing effect on the world at large and the possibilitiesof disturbances arising as a result of the desperation of the people concerned,the consequences to the economy of the United States should be apparentto all. It is logical that the United States should do whatever it is ableto do to assist in the return of normal economic health in the world, without which therecan be no political stability and no assured peace. Our policy is directednot against any country or doctrine but against hunger, poverty, desperation,and chaos. Its purpose should be the revival of a working economy in theworld so as to permit the emergence of political and social conditionsin which free institutions can exist. Such assistance, I am convinced, must not be on a piecemeal basis, asvarious crises develop. Any assistance that this Government may renderin the future should provide a cure rather than a mere palliative. Anygovernment that is willing to assist in the task of recovery will findfull cooperation, I am sure, on the part of the United States Government.Any government which maneuvers to block the recovery of other countriescannot expect help from us. Furthermore, governments, political parties,or groups which seek to perpetuate human misery in order to profit therefrom politically or otherwise will encounter the opposition of the UnitedStates. It is already evident that before the United States Government can proceedmuch further in its efforts to alleviate the situation and help start theEuropean world on its way to recovery, there must be some agreement among the countriesof Europe as to the requirements of the situation and the part those countriesthemselves will take in order to give a proper effect to whatever actions mightbe undertaken by this Government. It would be neither fitting nor efficaciousfor our Government to undertake to draw up unilaterally a program designedto place Europe on its feet economically. This is the business of the Europeans.The initiative, I think, must come from Europe. The role of this country should consist of friendlyaid in the drafting of a European program and of later support of sucha program so far as it may be practical for us to do so. The program should be a joint one,agreed to by a number, if not all, European nations. An essential part of any successful action on the part of the UnitedStates is an understanding on the part of the people of America of thecharacter of the problem and the remedies to be applied. Political passion and prejudice shouldhave no part. With foresight, and a willingness on the part of our peopleto face up to the vast responsibility which history has clearly placedupon our country, the difficulties I have outlined can and will be overcome.       I am sorry that on each occasion I have said something publicly in regardto our international situation, I have been forced by the necessities ofthe case to enter into rather technical discussions. But, to my mind, it is of vast importancethat our people reach some general understanding of what the complicationsreally are, rather than react from a passion or a prejudice or an emotion of the moment. As I said more formally a moment ago, we are remote from the scene ofthese troubles. It is virtually impossible at this distance merely by reading,or listening, or even seeing photographs and motion pictures, to graspat all the real significance of the situation. And yet the whole worldof the future hangs on a proper judgment. It hangs, I think, to a largeextent on the realization of the American people, of just what are thevarious dominant factors. What are the reactions of the people? What arethe justifications of those reactions? What are the sufferings? What isneeded? What can best be done? What must be done?  Thank you very much.  Also       in this database: Harry S. Truman - "The Truman Doctrine" Audio Source:The Marshall Foundation Copyright Status: 