[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly from audio. (2)] *Ladies and gentlemen: I have come to a decision which I felt I shouldtell you and all of my fellow American citizens, as soon as I was certain in my own mindand in my own conscience that it is the right thing to do. *I have learned already in thisoffice that the difficult decisions always come to this desk. I must admit that many ofthem do not look at all the same as the hypothetical questions that I have answered freelyand perhaps too fast on previous occasions. My customary policy is to try and get all the facts and to considerthe opinions of my countrymen and to take counsel with my most valued friends. But theseseldom agree, and in the end, the decision is mine. To procrastinate, to agonize, and towait for a more favorable turn of events that may never come or more compelling externalpressures that may as well be wrong as right, is itself a decision of sorts and a weak andpotentially dangerous course for a President to follow. I have promised to uphold the Constitution, to do what is right asGod gives me to see the right, and to do the very best that I can for America. I haveasked your help and your prayers, not only when I became President but many times since.The Constitution is the supreme law of our land, and it governs our actions as citizens.Only the laws of God, which govern our consciences, are superior to it. As we are a nation under God, so I am sworn to uphold our laws withthe help of God. And I have sought such guidance and searched my own conscience withspecial diligence to determine the right thing for me to do with respect to my predecessorin this place, Richard Nixon, and his loyal wife and family. Theirs is an American tragedyin which we all -- all have played a part. It could go on and on and on, or someone must writethe end to it. I have concluded that only I can do that, and if I can, I must. There are no historic or legal precedents to which I can turn inthis matter, none that precisely fit the circumstances of a private citizen who hasresigned the Presidency of the United States. But it is common knowledge that seriousallegations and accusations hang like a sword over our former President's head,threatening his health as he tries to reshape his life, a great part of which was spent inthe service of this country and by the mandate of its people. After years of bitter controversy and divisive national debate, Ihave been advised, and I am compelled to conclude that many months and perhaps more yearswill have to pass before Richard Nixon could obtain a fair trial by jury in anyjurisdiction of the United States under governing decisions of the Supreme Court. I deeplybelieve in equal justice for all Americans, whatever their station or former station. Thelaw, whether human or divine, is no respecter of persons; but the law is a respecter ofreality. The facts, as I see them, are that a former President of the UnitedStates, instead of enjoying equal treatment with any other citizen accused of violatingthe law, would be cruelly and excessively penalized either in preserving the presumptionof his innocence or in obtaining a speedy determination of his guilt in order to repay alegal debt to society. During this long period of delay and potential litigation, uglypassions would again be aroused. And our people would again be polarized in theiropinions. And the credibility of our free institutions of government would again bechallenged at home and abroad. In the end, the courts might well hold that Richard Nixonhad been denied due process, and the verdict of history would even more be inconclusivewith respect to those charges arising out of the period of his Presidency, of which I ampresently aware. But it is not the ultimate fate of Richard Nixon that most concernsme, though surely it deeply troubles every decent and every compassionate person. Myconcern is the immediate future of this great country. In this, I dare not depend upon mypersonal sympathy as a long-time friend of the former President, nor my professionaljudgment as a lawyer, and I do not. As President, my primary concern must always be the greatest good ofall the people of the United States whose servant I am. As a man, my first considerationis to be true to my own convictions and my own conscience. My conscience tells me clearlyand certainly that I cannot prolong the bad dreams that continue to reopen a chapter thatis closed. My conscience tells me that only I, as President, have the constitutional powerto firmly shut and seal this book. My conscience tells me it is my duty, not merely toproclaim domestic tranquility but to use every means that I have to insure it. I do believe that the buck stops here, that I cannot rely uponpublic opinion polls to tell me what is right. I do believe that right makes might and that if I am wrong, 10angels swearing I was right would make no difference. I do believe, with all my heart and mind and spirit, that I, not asPresident but as a humble servant of God, will receive justice without mercy if I fail toshow mercy. Finally, I feel that Richard Nixon and his loved ones have sufferedenough and will continue to suffer, no matter what I do, no matter what we, as a great andgood nation, can do together to make his goal of peace come true.  Now, therefore, I, Gerald R. Ford, President of the United States,pursuant to the pardon power conferred upon me by Article II, Section 2,of the Constitution, have granted and by these presents do grant a full,free, and absolute pardon unto Richard Nixon for all offenses against theUnited States which he, Richard Nixon, has committed or may havecommitted or taken part in during the period from July 20,1969 through August 9, 1974.*In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand this eighth day ofSeptember, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and seventy-four,and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundredand ninety-ninth.*  *  Audio  Also in this database: Gerald R. Ford - Address on Taking the Oath of Office of U.S. Presidency Copyright Status: 