[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio.] [AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio.] Ladies and gentlemen of the convention: My name is Geraldine Ferraro. I stand before you to proclaim tonight:America is the land where dreams can come true for all of us. As I standbefore the American people and think of the honor this great conventionhas bestowed upon me, I recall the words of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.,who made America stronger by making America more free. He said, "Occasionallyin life there are moments which cannot be completely explained by words.Their meaning can only be articulated by the inaudible language of theheart." Tonight is such a moment for me. My heart is filled with pride. My fellow citizens, I proudly acceptyour nomination for Vice President of the United States. And I am proud to run with a man who will be one of the great Presidentsof this century, Walter F. Mondale. Tonight, the daughter of a woman whosehighest goal was a future for her children talks to our nation's oldestparty about a future for us all. Tonight, the daughter of working Americanstells all Americans that the future is within our reach, if we're willingto reach for it. Tonight, the daughter of an immigrant from Italy has beenchosen to run for [Vice] President in the new land my father came to love. Our faith that we can shape a better future is what the American dreamis all about. The promise of our country is that the rules are fair. Ifyou work hard and play by the rules, you can earn your share of America'sblessings. Those are the beliefs I learned from my parents. And those arethe values I taught my students as a teacher in the public schools of NewYork City. At night, I went to law school. I became an assistant district attorney,and I put my share of criminals behind bars. I believe if you obey thelaw, you should be protected. But if you break the law, you must pay foryour crime. When I first ran for Congress, all the political experts said a Democratcould not win my home district in Queens. I put my faith in the peopleand the values that we shared. Together, we proved the political expertswrong. In this campaign, Fritz Mondale and I have put our faith in thepeople. And we are going to prove the experts wrong again. We are goingto win. We are going to win because Americans across this country believein the same basic dream. Last week, I visited Elmore, Minnesota, the small town where Fritz Mondalewas raised. And soon Fritz and Joan will visit our family in Queens. Ninehundred people live in Elmore. In Queens, there are 2,000 people on oneblock. You would think we'd be different, but we're not. Children walkto school in Elmore past grain elevators; in Queens, they pass by subwaystops. But, no matter where they live, their future depends on education,and their parents are willing to do their part to make those schools asgood as they can be. In Elmore, there are family farms; in Queens, smallbusinesses. But the men and women who run them all take pride in supportingtheir families through hard work and initiative. On the 4th of July inElmore, they hang flags out on Main Street; in Queens, they fly them overGrand Avenue. But all of us love our country, and stand ready to defendthe freedom that it represents. Americans want to live by the same set of rules. But under this administration,the rules are rigged against too many of our people. It isn't right thatevery year the share of taxes paid by individual citizens is going up,while the share paid by large corporations is getting smaller and smaller.The rules say: Everyone in our society should contribute their fair share.It isn't right that this year Ronald Reagan will hand the American peoplea bill for interest on the national debt larger than the entire cost ofthe federal government under John F. Kennedy. Our parents left us a growingeconomy. The rules say: We must not leave our kids a mountain of debt. It isn't right that a woman should get paid 59 cents on the dollar forthe same work as a man. If you play by the rules, you deserve a fair day's pay for a fair day'swork. It isn't right that, if trends continue, by the year 2000 nearlyall of the poor people in America will be women and children. The rulesof a decent society say: When you distribute sacrifice in times of austerity,you don't put women and children first. It isn't right that young peopletoday fear they won't get the Social Security they paid for, and that olderAmericans fear that they will lose what they have already learned [earned]. SocialSecurity is a contract between the last generation and the next, and therules say: You don't break contracts. We are going to keep faith with older Americans. We hammered out a faircompromise in the Congress to save Social Security. Every group sacrificedto keep the system sound. It is time Ronald Reagan stopped scaring oursenior citizens. It isn't right that young couples question whether to bring childreninto a world of 50,000 nuclear warheads. That isn't the vision for which Americans have struggled for more thantwo centuries. And our future doesn't have to be that way. Change is inthe air, just as surely as when John Kennedy beckoned America to a newfrontier; when Sally Ride rocketed into space; and when Reverend JesseJackson ran for the office of President of the United States. By choosing a woman to run for our nation's second highest office, yousend a powerful signal to all Americans: There are no doors we cannot unlock.We will place no limits on achievement. If we can do this, we can do anything. Tonight, we reclaim our dream. We're going to make the rules of Americanlife work fairly for all Americans again. To an Administration that wouldhave us debate all over again whether the Voting Rights Act should be renewedand whether segregated schools should be tax exempt, we say, Mr. President:Those debates are over. On the issue of civil rights, voting rights, andaffirmative action for minorities, we must not go backwards. We must --and we will -- move forward to open the doors of opportunity. To those who understand that our country cannot prosper unless we drawon the talents of all Americans, we say: We will pass the Equal RightsAmendment. The issue is not what America can do for women, but what women can dofor America. To the Americans who will lead our country into the 21st century, wesay: We will not have a Supreme Court that turns the clock back to the19th century. To those concerned about the strength of American and family values,as I am, I say: We are going to restore those values -- love, caring, partnership-- by including, and not excluding, those whose beliefs differ from ourown. Because our own faith is strong, we will fight to preserve the freedomof faith for others. To those working Americans who fear that banks, utilities, and largespecial interests have a lock on the White House, we say: Join us; let'select the people's President; and let's have government by and for the Americanpeople again. To an Administration that would savage student loans and education atthe dawn of a new technological age, we say: You fit the classic definitionof a cynic; you know the price of everything, but the value of nothing. To our students and their parents, we say: We will insist on the higheststandards of excellence, because the jobs of the future require skilledminds. To young Americans who may be called to our country's service, wesay: We know your generation will proudly answer our country's call, aseach generation before you. This past year, we remembered the bravery and sacrifice of Americansat Normandy. And we finally paid tribute -- as we should have done yearsago -- to that Unknown Soldier who represents all the brave young Americanswho died in Vietnam. Let no one doubt, we will defend America's securityand the cause of freedom around the world. But we want a President whotells us what America's fighting for, not just what we are fighting against. We want a President who will defend human rights, not just where itis convenient, but wherever freedom is at risk -- from Chile to Afghanistan,from Poland to South Africa. To those who have watched this administration'sconfusion in the Middle East, as it has tilted first toward one and thenanother of Israel's long-time enemies and wonder: "Will America stand byher friends and sister democracy?" we say: America knows who her friendsare in the Middle East and around the world. America will stand with Israelalways. Finally, we want a President who will keep America strong, but use thatstrength to keep America and the world at peace. A nuclear freeze is nota slogan: It is a tool for survival in the nuclear age. If we leave ourchildren nothing else, let us leave them this Earth as we found it: wholeand green and full of life. I know in my heart that Walter Mondale will be that President. A wise man once said, "Every one of us is given the gift of life, andwhat a strange gift it is. If it is preserved jealously and selfishly,it impoverishes and saddens. But if it is spent for others, it enrichesand beautifies." My fellow Americans: We can debate policies and programs,but in the end what separates the two parties in this election campaignis whether we use the gift of life for others or only ourselves. Tonight, my husband, John, and our three children are in this hall withme. To my daughters, Donna and Laura, and my son, John Junior, I say: Mymother did not break faith with me, and I will not break faith with you. To all the children of America, I say: The generation before ours keptfaith with us, and like them, we will pass on to you a stronger, more justAmerica. Thank you.  Also in this       database: Mario Cuomo -- 1984 DNC Keynote Address Copyright Status: 