[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio.] Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Congress of the United States:       The gravity of the situation which confronts the world today necessitatesmy appearance before a joint session of the Congress. The foreign policyand the national security of this country are involved. One aspect of thepresent situation, which I present to you at this time for your considerationand decision, concerns Greece and Turkey. The United States has receivedfrom the Greek Government an urgent appeal for financial and economic assistance.Preliminary reports from the American Economic Mission now in Greece andreports from the American Ambassador in Greece corroborate the statementof the Greek Government that assistance is imperative if Greece is to surviveas a free nation.  I do not believe that the American people and the Congress wish to turna deaf ear to the appeal of the Greek Government. Greece is not a richcountry. Lack of sufficient natural resources has always forced theGreek people to work hard to make both ends meet. Since 1940, this industrious,peace loving country has suffered invasion, four years of cruel enemy occupation,and bitter internal strife.  When forces of liberation entered Greece they found that the retreatingGermans had destroyed virtually all the railways, roads, port facilities,communications, and merchant marine. More than a thousand villages hadbeen burned. Eighty-five percent of the children were tubercular. Livestock,poultry, and draft animals had almost disappeared. Inflation had wipedout practically all savings. As a result of these tragic conditions, amilitant minority, exploiting human want and misery, was able to createpolitical chaos which, until now, has made economic recovery impossible.  Greece is today without funds to finance the importation of those goodswhich are essential to bare subsistence. Under these circumstances, thepeople of Greece cannot make progress in solving their problems of reconstruction.Greece is in desperate need of financial and economic assistance to enableit to resume purchases of food, clothing, fuel, and seeds. These are indispensablefor the subsistence of its people and are obtainable only from abroad.Greece must have help to import the goods necessary to restore internalorder and security, so essential for economic and political recovery. TheGreek Government has also asked for the assistance of experienced Americanadministrators, economists, and technicians to insure that the financialand other aid given to Greece shall be used effectively in creating a stableand self-sustaining economy and in improving its public administration.  The very existence of the Greek state is today threatened by the terroristactivities of several thousand armed men, led by Communists, who defy thegovernment's authority at a number of points, particularly along the northernboundaries. A Commission appointed by the United Nations security Councilis at present investigating disturbed conditions in northern Greece andalleged border violations along the frontiers between Greece on the onehand and Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia on the other.  Meanwhile, the Greek Government is unable to cope with the situation.The Greek army is small and poorly equipped. It needs supplies and equipmentif it is to restore authority of the government throughout Greek territory.Greece must have assistance if it is to become a self-supporting and self-respectingdemocracy. The United States must supply this assistance. We have alreadyextended to Greece certain types of relief and economic aid. But theseare inadequate. There is no other country to which democratic Greece canturn. No other nation is willing and able to provide the necessary supportfor a democratic Greek government.  The British Government, which has been helping Greece, can give no furtherfinancial or economic aid after March 31st. Great Britain finds itselfunder the necessity of reducing or liquidating its commitments in severalparts of the world, including Greece.  We have considered how the United Nations might assist in this crisis.But the situation is an urgent one, requiring immediate action, and theUnited Nations and its related organizations are not in a position to extendhelp of the kind that is required.  It is important to note that the Greek Government has asked for ouraid in utilizing effectively the financial and other assistance we maygive to Greece, and in improving its public administration. It is of theutmost importance that we supervise the use of any funds made availableto Greece in such a manner that each dollar spent will count toward makingGreece self-supporting, and will help to build an economy in which a healthydemocracy can flourish.  No government is perfect. One of the chief virtues of a democracy, however,is that its defects are always visible and under democratic processes canbe pointed out and corrected. The Government of Greece is not perfect.Nevertheless it represents eighty-five percent of the members of the GreekParliament who were chosen in an election last year. Foreign observers,including 692 Americans, considered this election to be a fair expressionof the views of the Greek people.  The Greek Government has been operating in an atmosphere of chaos andextremism. It has made mistakes. The extension of aid by this country doesnot mean that the United States condones everything that the Greek Governmenthas done or will do. We have condemned in the past, and we condemn now,extremist measures of the right or the left. We have in the past advisedtolerance, and we advise tolerance now.  Greek's [sic] neighbor, Turkey, also deserves our attention. The futureof Turkey, as an independent and economically sound state, is clearly noless important to the freedom-loving peoples of the world than the futureof Greece. The circumstances in which Turkey finds itself today are considerablydifferent from those of Greece. Turkey has been spared the disasters thathave beset Greece. And during the war, the United States and Great Britainfurnished Turkey with material aid.  Nevertheless, Turkey now needs our support. Since the war, Turkey hassought additional financial assistance from Great Britain and the United States forthe purpose of effecting that modernization necessary for the maintenanceof its national integrity. That integrity is essential to the preservationof order in the Middle East. The British government has informed us that,owing to its own difficulties, it can no longer extend financial or economicaid to Turkey. As in the case of Greece, if Turkey is to have the assistanceit needs, the United States must supply it. We are the only country ableto provide that help.  I am fully aware of the broad implications involved if the United Statesextends assistance to Greece and Turkey, and I shall discuss these implicationswith you at this time. One of the primary objectives of the foreign policyof the United States is the creation of conditions in which we and othernations will be able to work out a way of life free from coercion. Thiswas a fundamental issue in the war with Germany and Japan. Our victorywas won over countries which sought to impose their will, and their wayof life, upon other nations.  To ensure the peaceful development of nations, free from coercion, theUnited States has taken a leading part in establishing the United Nations.The United Nations is designed to make possible lasting freedom and independencefor all its members. We shall not realize our objectives, however, unlesswe are willing to help free peoples to maintain their free institutionsand their national integrity against aggressive movements that seek toimpose upon them totalitarian regimes. This is no more than a frank recognitionthat totalitarian regimes imposed upon free peoples, by direct or indirectaggression, undermine the foundations of international peace, and hencethe security of the United States.  The peoples of a number of countries of the world have recently hadtotalitarian regimes forced upon them against their will. The Governmentof the United States has made frequent protests against coercion and intimidationin violation of the Yalta agreement in Poland, Rumania, and Bulgaria. Imust also state that in a number of other countries there have been similardevelopments.  At the present moment in world history nearly every nation must choosebetween alternative ways of life. The choice is too often not a free one.One way of life is based upon the will of the majority, and is distinguishedby free institutions, representative government, free elections, guaranteesof individual liberty, freedom of speech and religion, and freedom frompolitical oppression. The second way of life is based upon the will ofa minority forcibly imposed upon the majority. It relies upon terror andoppression, a controlled press and radio, fixed elections, and the suppressionof personal freedoms.  I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to supportfree peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minoritiesor by outside pressures.  I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destiniesin their own way.  I believe that our help should be primarily through economic and financialaid which is essential to economic stability and orderly political processes. The world is not static, and the status quo is not sacred. Butwe cannot allow changes in the status quo in violation of the Charter ofthe United Nations by such methods as coercion, or by such subterfugesas political infiltration. In helping free and independent nations to maintaintheir freedom, the United States will be giving effect to the principlesof the Charter of the United Nations.  It is necessary only to glance at a map to realize that the survivaland integrity of the Greek nation are of grave importance in a much widersituation. If Greece should fall under the control of an armed minority,the effect upon its neighbor, Turkey, would be immediate and serious. Confusionand disorder might well spread throughout the entire Middle East. Moreover,the disappearance of Greece as an independent state would have a profoundeffect upon those countries in Europe whose peoples are struggling againstgreat difficulties to maintain their freedoms and their independence whilethey repair the damages of war.  It would be an unspeakable tragedy if these countries, which have struggledso long against overwhelming odds, should lose that victory for which theysacrificed so much. Collapse of free institutions and loss of independencewould be disastrous not only for them but for the world. Discouragementand possibly failure would quickly be the lot of neighboring peoples strivingto maintain their freedom and independence.  Should we fail to aid Greece and Turkey in this fateful hour, the effectwill be far reaching to the West as well as to the East.  We must take immediate and resolute action. I therefore ask the Congressto provide authority for assistance to Greece and Turkey in the amountof $400,000,000 for the period ending June 30, 1948. In requesting thesefunds, I have taken into consideration the maximum amount of relief assistancewhich would be furnished to Greece out of the $350,000,000 which I recentlyrequested that the Congress authorize for the prevention of starvationand suffering in countries devastated by the war.  In addition to funds, I ask the Congress to authorize the detail ofAmerican civilian and military personnel to Greece and Turkey, at the requestof those countries, to assist in the tasks of reconstruction, and for thepurpose of supervising the use of such financial and material assistanceas may be furnished. I recommend that authority also be provided for theinstruction and training of selected Greek and Turkish personnel. Finally,I ask that the Congress provide authority which will permit the speediestand most effective use, in terms of needed commodities, supplies, and equipment,of such funds as may be authorized. If further funds, or further authority,should be needed for the purposes indicated in this message, I shall not hesitateto bring the situation before the Congress. On this subject the Executiveand Legislative branches of the Government must work together.  This is a serious course upon which we embark. I would not recommendit except that the alternative is much more serious. The United Statescontributed $341,000,000,000 toward winning World War II. This is an investmentin world freedom and world peace. The assistance that I am recommendingfor Greece and Turkey amounts to little more than 1 tenth of 1 percentof this investment. It is only common sense that we should safeguard thisinvestment and make sure that it was not in vain. The seeds of totalitarianregimes are nurtured by misery and want. They spread and grow in the evilsoil of poverty and strife. They reach their full growth when the hopeof a people for a better life has died.  We must keep that hope alive.  The free peoples of the world look to us for support in maintainingtheir freedoms. If we falter in our leadership, we may endanger the peaceof the world. And we shall surely endanger the welfare of this nation.  Great responsibilities have been placed upon us by the swift movementof events.  I am confident that the Congress will face these responsibilities squarely.  Also in this       database: George C. Marshall -- "The Marshall Plan" Image Source:http://www.trumanlibrary.org Copyright Status: 