[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio. (2)] [AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio. (2)] President Anderson, members of the faculty, board of trustees, distinguishedguests, my old colleague, Senator Bob Byrd, who has earned his degree throughmany years of attending night law school, while I am earning mine in thenext 30 minutes, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:  It is with great pride that I participate in this ceremony of the AmericanUniversity, sponsored by the Methodist Church, founded by Bishop John FletcherHurst, and first opened by President Woodrow Wilson in 1914. This is ayoung and growing university, but it has already fulfilled Bishop Hurst'senlightened hope for the study of history and public affairs in a citydevoted to the making of history and to the conduct of the public's business.By sponsoring this institution of higher learning for all who wish to learn,whatever their color or their creed, the Methodists of this area and theNation deserve the Nation's thanks, and I commend all those who are todaygraduating.  Professor Woodrow Wilson once said that every man sent out from a universityshould be a man of his nation as well as a man of his time, and I am confidentthat the men and women who carry the honor of graduating from this institutionwill continue to give from their lives, from their talents, a high measureof public service and public support. "There are few earthly things morebeautiful than a university," wrote John Masefield in his tribute to Englishuniversities -- and his words are equally true today. He did not referto towers or to campuses. He admired the splendid beauty of a university,because it was, he said, "a place where those who hate ignorance may striveto know, where those who perceive truth may strive to make others see."  I have, therefore, chosen this time and place to discuss a topic onwhich ignorance too often abounds and the truth too rarely perceived. Andthat is the most important topic on earth: peace. What kind of peace doI mean and what kind of a peace do we seek? Not a Pax Americana enforcedon the world by American weapons of war. Not the peace of the grave orthe security of the slave. I am talking about genuine peace, the kind ofpeace that makes life on earth worth living, and the kind that enables menand nations to grow, and to hope, and build a better life for theirchildren -- not merely peace for Americans but peace for all men and women, not merely peace in our time but peace in all time.  I speak of peace because of the new face of war. Total war makes nosense in an age where great powers can maintain large and relatively invulnerablenuclear forces and refuse to surrender without resort to those forces.It makes no sense in an age where a single nuclear weapon contains almostten times the explosive force delivered by all the allied air forces inthe Second World War. It makes no sense in an age when the deadly poisonsproduced by a nuclear exchange would be carried by wind and water and soiland seed to the far corners of the globe and to generations yet unborn.  Today the expenditure of billions of dollars every year on weapons acquiredfor the purpose of making sure we never need them is essential to the keepingof peace. But surely the acquisition of such idle stockpiles -- which canonly destroy and never create -- is not the only, much less the most efficient,means of assuring peace. I speak of peace, therefore, as the necessary,rational end of rational men. I realize the pursuit of peace is notas dramatic as the pursuit of war, and frequently the words of the pursuersfall on deaf ears. But we have no more urgent task.  Some say that it is useless to speak of peace or world law or worlddisarmament, and that it will be useless until the leaders of the SovietUnion adopt a more enlightened attitude. I hope they do. I believe we canhelp them do it. But I also believe that we must reexamine our own attitudes,as individuals and as a Nation, for our attitude is as essential as theirs.And every graduate of this school, every thoughtful citizen who despairsof war and wishes to bring peace, should begin by looking inward, by examininghis own attitude towards the possibilities of peace, towards the SovietUnion, towards the course of the cold war and towards freedom and peacehere at home.  First examine our attitude towards peace itself. Too many of us thinkit is impossible. Too many think it is unreal. But that is a dangerous,defeatist belief. It leads to the conclusion that war is inevitable, thatmankind is doomed, that we are gripped by forces we cannot control. Weneed not accept that view. Our problems are manmade; therefore, they canbe solved by man. And man can be as big as he wants. No problem of humandestiny is beyond human beings. Man's reason and spirit have often solvedthe seemingly unsolvable, and we believe they can do it again. I am notreferring to the absolute, infinite concept of universal peace and goodwill of which some fantasies and fanatics dream. I do not deny the valueof hopes and dreams but we merely invite discouragement and incredulityby making that our only and immediate goal.  Let us focus instead on a more practical, more attainable peace, basednot on a sudden revolution in human nature but on a gradual evolution inhuman institutions -- on a series of concrete actions and effective agreementswhich are in the interest of all concerned. There is no single, simplekey to this peace; no grand or magic formula to be adopted by one or twopowers. Genuine peace must be the product of many nations, the sum of manyacts. It must be dynamic, not static, changing to meet the challenge ofeach new generation. For peace is a process -- a way of solving problems.  With such a peace, there will still be quarrels and conflicting interests,as there are within families and nations. World peace, like community peace,does not require that each man love his neighbor, it requires only thatthey live together in mutual tolerance, submitting their disputes to ajust and peaceful settlement. And history teaches us that enmities betweennations, as between individuals, do not last forever. However fixed ourlikes and dislikes may seem, the tide of time and events will often bringsurprising changes in the relations between nations and neighbors. So letus persevere. Peace need not be impracticable, and war need not be inevitable.By defining our goal more clearly, by making it seem more manageable andless remote, we can help all people to see it, to draw hope from it, andto move irresistibly towards it.  And second, let us reexamine our attitude towards the Soviet Union.It is discouraging to think that their leaders may actually believe whattheir propagandists write. It is discouraging to read a recent, authoritativeSoviet text on military strategy and find, on page after page, wholly baselessand incredible claims, such as the allegation that American imperialistcircles are preparing to unleash different types of war, that there isa very real threat of a preventive war being unleashed by American imperialistsagainst the Soviet Union, and that the political aims -- and I quote-- "of the American imperialists are to enslave economically and politicallythe European and other capitalist countries and to achieve world dominationby means of aggressive war."  Truly, as it was written long ago: "The wicked flee when no man pursueth." Yet it is sad to read these Soviet statements, to realize the extentof the gulf between us. But it is also a warning, a warning to the Americanpeople not to fall into the same trap as the Soviets, not to see only adistorted and desperate view of the other side, not to see conflict asinevitable, accommodation as impossible, and communication as nothing morethan an exchange of threats.  No government or social system is so evil that its people must be consideredas lacking in virtue. As Americans, we find communism profoundly repugnantas a negation of personal freedom and dignity. But we can still hail theRussian people for their many achievements in science and space, in economicand industrial growth, in culture, in acts of courage.  Among the many traits the peoples of our two countries have in common,none is stronger than our mutual abhorrence of war. Almost unique amongthe major world powers, we have never been at war with each other. Andno nation in the history of battle ever suffered more than the Soviet Unionin the Second World War. At least 20 million lost their lives.Countless millions of homes and families were burned or sacked. A thirdof the nation's territory, including two thirds of its industrial base,was turned into a wasteland -- a loss equivalent to the destruction ofthis country east of Chicago.  Today, should total war ever break out again -- no matter how -- ourtwo countries will be the primary target. It is an ironic but accuratefact that the two strongest powers are the two in the most danger of devastation.All we have built, all we have worked for, would be destroyed in the first24 hours. And even in the cold war, which brings burdens and dangers toso many countries, including this Nation's closest allies, our two countriesbear the heaviest burdens. For we are both devoting massive sums of moneyto weapons that could be better devoted to combat ignorance, poverty, anddisease. We are both caught up in a vicious and dangerous cycle, with suspicionon one side breeding suspicion on the other, and new weapons begetting counter-weapons.In short, both the United States and its allies, and the Soviet Union andits allies, have a mutually deep interest in a just and genuine peace andin halting the arms race. Agreements to this end are in the interests ofthe Soviet Union as well as ours. And even the most hostile nations canbe relied upon to accept and keep those treaty obligations, and only thosetreaty obligations, which are in their own interest.  So let us not be blind to our differences, but let us also direct attentionto our common interests and the means by which those differences can beresolved. And if we cannot end now our differences, at least we can helpmake the world safe for diversity. For in the final analysis, our mostbasic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet. We all breathethe same air. We all cherish our children's futures. And we are all mortal. Third, let us reexamine our attitude towards the cold war, rememberingwe're not engaged in a debate, seeking to pile up debating points. We arenot here distributing blame or pointing the finger of judgment. We mustdeal with the world as it is, and not as it might have been had the historyof the last 18 years been different. We must, therefore, persevere in thesearch for peace in the hope that constructive changes within the Communistbloc might bring within reach solutions which now seem beyond us. We mustconduct our affairs in such a way that it becomes in the Communists' interestto agree on a genuine peace. And above all, while defending our own vitalinterests, nuclear powers must avert those confrontations which bring anadversary to a choice of either a humiliating retreat or a nuclear war.To adopt that kind of course in the nuclear age would be evidence onlyof the bankruptcy of our policy -- or of a collective death-wish for theworld.  To secure these ends, America's weapons are nonprovocative, carefullycontrolled, designed to deter, and capable of selective use. Our militaryforces are committed to peace and disciplined in self-restraint. Our diplomatsare instructed to avoid unnecessary irritants and purely rhetorical hostility.For we can seek a relaxation of tensions without relaxing our guard. And,for our part, we do not need to use threats to prove we are resolute. Wedo not need to jam foreign broadcasts out of fear our faith will be eroded.We are unwilling to impose our system on any unwilling people, but we arewilling and able to engage in peaceful competition with any people on earth. Meanwhile, we seek to strengthen the United Nations, to help solve itsfinancial problems, to make it a more effective instrument for peace, todevelop it into a genuine world security system -- a system capable ofresolving disputes on the basis of law, of insuring the security of thelarge and the small, and of creating conditions under which arms can finallybe abolished. At the same time we seek to keep peace inside the non-Communistworld, where many nations, all of them our friends, are divided over issueswhich weaken Western unity, which invite Communist intervention, or whichthreaten to erupt into war. Our efforts in West New Guinea, in the Congo,in the Middle East, and the Indian subcontinent, have been persistent andpatient despite criticism from both sides. We have also tried to set anexample for others, by seeking to adjust small but significant differenceswith our own closest neighbors in Mexico and Canada.  Speaking of other nations, I wish to make one point clear. We are boundto many nations by alliances. Those alliances exist because our concernand theirs substantially overlap. Our commitment to defend Western Europeand West Berlin, for example, stands undiminished because of the identityof our vital interests. The United States will make no deal with the SovietUnion at the expense of other nations and other peoples, not merely becausethey are our partners, but also because their interests and ours converge.Our interests converge, however, not only in defending the frontiers offreedom, but in pursuing the paths of peace. It is our hope, and the purposeof allied policy, to convince the Soviet Union that she, too, should leteach nation choose its own future, so long as that choice does not interferewith the choices of others. The Communist drive to impose their politicaland economic system on others is the primary cause of world tension today.For there can be no doubt that if all nations could refrain from interferingin the self-determination of others, the peace would be much more assured. This will require a new effort to achieve world law, a new context forworld discussions. It will require increased understanding between theSoviets and ourselves. And increased understanding will require increasedcontact and communication. One step in this direction is the proposed arrangementfor a direct line between Moscow and Washington, to avoid on each sidethe dangerous delays, misunderstandings, and misreadings of others' actionswhich might occur at a time of crisis.  We have also been talking in Geneva about our first-step measures ofarm[s] controls designed to limit the intensity of the arms race and reducethe risk of accidental war. Our primary long range interest in Geneva,however, is general and complete disarmament, designed to take place bystages, permitting parallel political developments to build the new institutionsof peace which would take the place of arms. The pursuit of disarmamenthas been an effort of this Government since the 1920's. It has been urgentlysought by the past three administrations. And however dim the prospectsare today, we intend to continue this effort -- to continue it in orderthat all countries, including our own, can better grasp what the problemsand possibilities of disarmament are.  The only major area of these negotiations where the end is in sight,yet where a fresh start is badly needed, is in a treaty to outlaw nucleartests. The conclusion of such a treaty, so near and yet so far, would checkthe spiraling arms race in one of its most dangerous areas. It would placethe nuclear powers in a position to deal more effectively with one of thegreatest hazards which man faces in 1963, the further spread of nucleararms. It would increase our security; it would decrease the prospects ofwar. Surely this goal is sufficiently important to require our steady pursuit,yielding neither to the temptation to give up the whole effort nor thetemptation to give up our insistence on vital and responsible safeguards.  I'm taking this opportunity, therefore, to announce two important decisionsin this regard. First, Chairman Khrushchev, Prime Minister Macmillan, andI have agreed that high-level discussions will shortly begin in Moscowlooking towards early agreement on a comprehensive test ban treaty. Ourhope must be tempered -- Our hopes must be tempered with the caution of history; but with our hopesgo the hopes of all mankind. Second, to make clear our good faith and solemnconvictions on this matter, I now declare that the United States does notpropose to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere so long as other statesdo not do so. We will not -- We will not be the first to resume. Such a declaration isno substitute for a formal binding treaty, but I hope it will help us achieveone. Nor would such a treaty be a substitute for disarmament, but I hopeit will help us achieve it.  Finally, my fellow Americans, let us examine our attitude towards peaceand freedom here at home. The quality and spirit of our own society mustjustify and support our efforts abroad. We must show it in the dedicationof our own lives -- as many of you who are graduating today will have anopportunity to do, by serving without pay in the Peace Corps abroad orin the proposed National Service Corps here at home. But wherever we are,we must all, in our daily lives, live up to the age-old faith that peaceand freedom walk together. In too many of our cities today, the peace isnot secure because freedom is incomplete. It is the responsibility of theexecutive branch at all levels of government -- local, State, and National-- to provide and protect that freedom for all of our citizens by all meanswithin our authority. It is the responsibility of the legislative branchat all levels, wherever the authority is not now adequate, to make it adequate.And it is the responsibility of all citizens in all sections of this countryto respect the rights of others and respect the law of the land.  All this -- All this is not unrelated to world peace. "When a man's way[s] pleasethe Lord," the Scriptures tell us, "He maketh even his enemies to be atpeace with him." And is not peace, in the last analysis, basically a matterof human rights: the right to live out our lives without fear of devastation;the right to breathe air as nature provided it; the right of future generationsto a healthy existence?  While we proceed to safeguard our national interests, let us also safeguardhuman interests. And the elimination of war and arms is clearly in theinterest of both. No treaty, however much it may be to the advantage ofall, however tightly it may be worded, can provide absolute security againstthe risks of deception and evasion. But it can, if it is sufficiently effectivein its enforcement, and it is sufficiently in the interests of its signers,offer far more security and far fewer risks than an unabated, uncontrolled,unpredictable arms race.  The United States, as the world knows, will never start a war. We donot want a war. We do not now expect a war. This generation of Americanshas already had enough -- more than enough -- of war and hate and oppression. We shall be prepared if others wish it. We shall be alert to try tostop it. But we shall also do our part to build a world of peace wherethe weak are safe and the strong are just. We are not helpless before thattask or hopeless of its success. Confident and unafraid, we must laboron--not towards a strategy of annihilation but towards a strategy of peace.  Audio Source: The Mills Center for Public Affairs --Scripps Library and Multimedia Archive Image Source: John F, Kennedy Library Also in       this database: John F. Kennedy - "Ich bin ein 'Berliner'" U.S. Copyright Status: 