[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio. (2)] I am proud to come to this city as the guest of your distinguished Mayor,who has symbolized throughout the world the fighting spirit of West Berlin.And I am proud -- And I am proud to visit the Federal Republic with your distinguished Chancellorwho for so many years has committed Germany to democracy and freedom andprogress, and to come here in the company of my fellow American, GeneralClay, who -- who has been in this city during its great moments of crisis andwill come again if ever needed. Two thousand years ago -- Two thousand years ago,the proudest boast was "civis Romanus sum." (I appreciate my interpreter translating my German.) There are many people in the world who really don't understand, or saythey don't, what is the great issue between the free world and the Communistworld.  L There are some who say -- There are some who say that communism is the wave of the future. L And there are some who say, in Europe and elsewhere, we can work withthe Communists. L And there are even a few who say that it is true that communism is anevil system, but it permits us to make economic progress. Lass' sie nach Berlin kommen. L Freedom has many difficulties and democracy is not perfect.       But we havenever had to put a wall up to keep our people in -- to prevent them fromleaving us. I want to say on behalf of my countrymen who live many milesaway on the other side of the Atlantic, who are far distant from you, thatthey take the greatest pride, that they have been able to share with you,even from a distance, the story of the last 18 years. I know of no town,no city, that has been besieged for 18 years that still lives with thevitality and the force, and the hope, and the determination of the city of West       Berlin. Freedom has many difficulties and democracy is not perfect.       But we havenever had to put a wall up to keep our people in -- to prevent them fromleaving us. I want to say on behalf of my countrymen who live many milesaway on the other side of the Atlantic, who are far distant from you, thatthey take the greatest pride, that they have been able to share with you,even from a distance, the story of the last 18 years. I know of no town,no city, that has been besieged for 18 years that still lives with thevitality and the force, and the hope, and the determination of the city of West       Berlin. While the wall is the most obvious and       vivid demonstration of the failures of the Communist system -- for all the       world to see -- we take no satisfaction in it; for it is, as your Mayor       has said, an offense not only against history but an offense against       humanity, separating families, dividing husbands and wives and brothers       and sisters, and dividing a people who wish to be joined together. What is -- What is true of this city is true of Germany: Real,       lasting peace in Europe can never be assured as long as one German out of       four is denied the elementary right of free men, and that is to make a       free choice. In 18 years of peace and good faith, this generation of       Germans has earned the right to be free, including the right to unite       their families and their nation in lasting peace, with good will to all       people. You live in a defended island of       freedom, but your life is part of the main. So let me ask you, as I close,       to lift your eyes beyond the dangers of today, to the hopes of tomorrow,       beyond the freedom merely of this city of Berlin, or your country of       Germany, to the advance of freedom everywhere, beyond the wall to the day       of peace with justice, beyond yourselves and ourselves to all mankind. Freedom is indivisible, and when one man is enslaved, all are not free.When all are free, then we look -- can look forward to that day when this citywill be joined as one and this country and this great Continent of Europein a peaceful and hopeful globe. When that day finally comes, as it will,the people of West Berlin can take sober satisfaction in the fact that they were in the front lines for almosttwo decades. All -- All free men, wherever they may live, are citizens of Berlin. And, therefore, as a free man, I take pride in the       words -- "Ich bin ein Berliner."  1 "I am a citizen of Rome" or "I am a Roman citizen" Also in this database:John F. Kennedy - Greater Houston Area Ministerial Association Address Note: Audio and Video does not include German translation occurring alongside Kennedy's remarks. Audio Source:The JFK Presidential Presidential Library & Museum U.S. Copyright Status: 