[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio.] Good evening, my fellow citizens:  This Government, as promised, has maintained the closest surveillanceof the Soviet military buildup on the island of Cuba. Within the past week,unmistakable evidence has established the fact that a series of offensivemissile sites is now in preparation on that imprisoned island. The purposeof these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capabilityagainst the Western Hemisphere. Upon receiving the first preliminary hard information of this naturelast Tuesday morning at 9 A.M., I directed that our surveillance be steppedup. And having now confirmed and completed our evaluation of the evidence and our decisionon a course of action, this Government feels obliged to report this newcrisis to you in fullest detail. The characteristics of these new missile sites indicate two distincttypes of installations. Several of them include medium range ballisticmissiles, capable of carrying a nuclear warhead for a distance of more than 1,000 nautical miles. Eachof these missiles, in short, is capable of striking Washington, D. C.,the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico City, or any other city in the southeastern partof the United States, in Central America, or in the Caribbean area. Click photo for high resolution Click photo for high resolution Additional sites not yet completed appear to be designed for intermediaterange ballistic missiles -- capable of traveling more than twice as far-- and thus capable of striking most of the major cities in the Western Hemisphere, rangingas far north as Hudson Bay, Canada, and as far south as Lima, Peru. Inaddition, jet bombers, capable of carrying nuclear weapons, are now being uncrated and assembledin Cuba, while the necessary air bases are being prepared. This urgent transformation of Cuba into an important strategic base-- by the presence of these large, long-range, and clearly offensive weaponsof sudden mass destruction -- constitutes an explicit threat to the peace and securityof all the Americas, in flagrant and deliberate defiance of the Rio Pactof 1947, the traditions of this nation and hemisphere, the joint resolutionof the 87th Congress, the Charter of the United Nations, and my own publicwarnings to the Soviets on September 4 and 13. This action also contradictsthe repeated assurances of Soviet spokesmen, both publicly and privatelydelivered, that the arms buildup in Cuba would retain its original defensivecharacter, and that the Soviet Union had no need or desire to station strategicmissiles. on the territory of any other nation. The size of this undertaking makes clear that it has been planned forsome months. Yet, only last month, after I had made clear the distinctionbetween any introduction of ground-to-ground missiles and the existenceof defensive antiaircraft missiles, the Soviet Government publicly statedon September 11 that, and I quote, "the armaments and military equipmentsent to Cuba are designed exclusively for defensive purposes," that thereis, and I quote the Soviet Government, "there is no need for the SovietGovernment to shift its weapons for a retaliatory blow to any other country,for instance Cuba," and that, and I quote their government, "the SovietUnion has so powerful rockets to carry these nuclear warheads that thereis no need to search for sites for them beyond the boundaries of the SovietUnion." That statement was false.  Only last Thursday, as evidence of this rapid offensive buildup wasalready in my hand, Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko told me in my officethat he was instructed to make it clear once again, as he said his governmenthad already done, that Soviet assistance to Cuba, and I quote, "pursuedsolely the purpose of contributing to the defense capabilities of Cuba,"that, and I quote him, "training by Soviet specialists of Cuban nationalsin handling defensive armaments was by no means offensive, and if it wereotherwise," Mr. Gromyko went on, "the Soviet Government would never becomeinvolved in rendering such assistance." That statement also was false. Neither the United States of America nor the world community of nationscan tolerate deliberate deception and offensive threats on the part ofany nation, large or small. We no longer live in a world where only the actual firing ofweapons represents a sufficient challenge to a nation's security to constitutemaximum peril. Nuclear weapons are so destructive and ballistic missiles are so swift, thatany substantially increased possibility of their use or any sudden changein their deployment may well be regarded as a definite threat to peace. For many years, both the Soviet Union and the United States, recognizingthis fact, have deployed strategic nuclear weapons with great care, neverupsetting the precarious status quo which insured that these weapons would not beused in the absence of some vital challenge. Our own strategic missileshave never been transferred to the territory of any other nation under a cloak of secrecyand deception; and our history -- unlike that of the Soviets since theend of World War II -- demonstrates that we have no desire to dominate or conquer any othernation or impose our system upon its people. Nevertheless, American citizenshave become adjusted to living daily on the bull's-eye of Soviet missiles locatedinside the U.S.S.R. or in submarines. In that sense, missiles in Cuba add to an already clear and presentdanger -- although it should be noted the nations of Latin America havenever previously been subjected to a potential nuclear threat. But this secret, swift, extraordinary buildup of Communist missiles-- in an area well known to have a special and historical relationshipto the United States and the nations of the Western Hemisphere, in violationof Soviet assurances, and in defiance of American and hemispheric policy-- this sudden, clandestine decision to station strategic weapons for thefirst time outside of Soviet soil -- is a deliberately provocative andunjustified change in the status quo which cannot be accepted by this country,if our courage and our commitments are ever to be trusted again by eitherfriend or foe. The 1930's taught us a clear lesson: aggressive conduct, if allowedto go unchecked and unchallenged, ultimately leads to war. This nationis opposed to war. We are also true to our word. Our unswerving objective,therefore, must be to prevent the use of these missiles against this orany other country, and to secure their withdrawal or elimination from theWestern Hemisphere.  Our policy has been one of patience and restraint, as befits a peacefuland powerful nation which leads a worldwide alliance. We have been determinednot to be diverted from our central concerns by mere irritants and fanatics.But now further action is required, and it is under way; and these actionsmay only be the beginning. We will not prematurely or unnecessarily risk the costs of worldwidenuclear war in which even the fruits of victory would be ashes in our mouth;but neither will we shrink from that risk at any time it must be faced. Acting, therefore, in the defense of our own security and of the entireWestern Hemisphere, and under the authority entrusted to me by the Constitutionas endorsed by the Resolution of the Congress, I have directed that thefollowing initial steps be taken immediately:  First: To halt this offensive buildup a strict quarantine on all offensivemilitary equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated. All shipsof any kind bound for Cuba from whatever nation or port will, if foundto contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back. This quarantinewill be extended, if needed, to other types of cargo and carriers. We arenot at this time, however, denying the necessities of life as the Sovietsattempted to do in their Berlin blockade of 1948. Second: I have directed the continued and increased close surveillanceof Cuba and its military buildup. The foreign ministers of the OAS [Organizationof American States], in their communiqu' of October 6, rejectedsecrecy on such matters in this hemisphere. Should these offensive militarypreparations continue, thus increasing the threat to the hemisphere, furtheraction will be justified. I have directed the Armed Forces to prepare forany eventualities; and I trust that in the interest of both the Cuban peopleand the Soviet technicians at the sites, the hazards to all concerned ofcontinuing this threat will be recognized. Third: It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missilelaunched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attackby the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response uponthe Soviet Union. Fourth: As a necessary military precaution, I have reinforced our baseat Guantanamo, evacuated today the dependents of our personnel there, andordered additional military units to be on a standby alert basis. Fifth: We are calling tonight for an immediate meeting of the Organ[ization]of Consultation under the Organization of American States, to considerthis threat to hemispheric security and to invoke articles 6 and 8 of theRio Treaty in support of all necessary action. The United Nations Charterallows for regional security arrangements, and the nations of this hemispheredecided long ago against the military presence of outside powers. Our otherallies around the world have also been alerted. Sixth: Under the Charter of the United Nations, we are asking tonightthat an emergency meeting of the Security Council be convoked without delayto take action against this latest Soviet threat to world peace. Our resolution willcall for the prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all offensive weaponsin Cuba, under the supervision of U.N. observers, before the quarantinecan be lifted. Seventh and finally:I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt andeliminate this clandestine, reckless, and provocative threat to world peaceand to stable relations between our two nations. I call upon him further to abandon this courseof world domination, and to join in an historic effort to end the perilousarms race and to transform the history of man. He has an opportunity now to move theworld back from the abyss of destruction by returning to his government'sown words that it had no need to station missiles outside its own territory,and withdrawing these weapons from Cuba by refraining from any action whichwill widen or deepen the present crisis, and then by participating in asearch for peaceful and permanent solutions. This nation is prepared to present its case against the Soviet threatto peace, and our own proposals for a peaceful world, at any time and inany forum -- in the OAS, in the United Nations, or in any other meetingthat could be useful -- without limiting our freedom of action. We havein the past made strenuous efforts to limit the spread of nuclear weapons.We have proposed the elimination of all arms and military bases in a fairand effective disarmament treaty. We are prepared to discuss new proposalsfor the removal of tensions on both sides, including the possibilitiesof a genuinely independent Cuba, free to determine its own destiny. Wehave no wish to war with the Soviet Union -- for we are a peaceful peoplewho desire to live in peace with all other peoples. But it is difficult to settle or even discuss these problems in an atmosphereof intimidation. That is why this latest Soviet threat -- or any otherthreat which is made either independently or in response to our actionsthis week-- must and will be met with determination. Any hostile move anywherein the world against the safety and freedom of peoples to whom we are committed,including in particular the brave people of West Berlin, will be met bywhatever action is needed. Finally, I want to say a few words to the captive people of Cuba, towhom this speech is being directly carried by special radio facilities.I speak to you as a friend, as one who knows of your deep attachment toyour fatherland, as one who shares your aspirations for liberty and justicefor all. And I have watched and the American people have watched with deepsorrow how your nationalist revolution was betrayed -- and how your fatherlandfell under foreign domination. Now your leaders are no longer Cuban leadersinspired by Cuban ideals. They are puppets and agents of an internationalconspiracy which has turned Cuba against your friends and neighbors inthe Americas, and turned it into the first Latin American country to becomea target for nuclear war -- the first Latin American country to have theseweapons on its soil. These new weapons are not in your interest. They contribute nothingto your peace and well-being. They can only undermine it. But this countryhas no wish to cause you to suffer or to impose any system upon you. We know that your livesand land are being used as pawns by those who deny your freedom. Many timesin the past, the Cuban people have risen to throw out tyrants who destroyedtheir liberty. And I have no doubt that most Cubans today look forwardto the time when they will be truly free -- free from foreign domination,free to choose their own leaders, free to select their own system, freeto own their own land, free to speak and write and worship without fearor degradation. And then shall Cuba be welcomed back to the society offree nations and to the associations of this hemisphere. My fellow citizens, let no one doubt that this is a difficult and dangerouseffort on which we have set out. No one can foresee precisely what courseit will take or what costs or casualties will be incurred. Many monthsof sacrifice and self-discipline lie ahead -- months in which both ourpatience and our will will be tested,months in which many threatsand denunciations will keep us aware of our dangers. But the greatest dangerof all would be to do nothing. The path we have chosen for the present is full of hazards, as all pathsare; but it is the one most consistent with our character and courage asa nation and our commitments around the world. The cost of freedom is always high, butAmericans have always paid it. And one path we shall never choose, andthat is the path of surrender or submission. Our goal is not the victory of might, but the vindication of right;not peace at the expense of freedom, but both peace and freedom, here inthis hemisphere, and, we hope, around the world. God willing, that goalwill be achieved. Thank you and good night.  Audio and Images Source: https://www.jfklibrary.org Also in this database:      Franklin Delano Roosevelt: Pearl Harbor       Address to the Nation Also in       this database: George W. Bush:       Ultimatum to Saddam Hussein U.S. Copyright Status: 