click for pdfclick for flash click for pdfclick for flash click for pdfclick for flash click for pdfclick for flash click for pdfclick for flash click for pdfclick for flash [AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio. (2)] Reverend Meza, Reverend Reck, I'm grateful for your generous invitationto state my views.  While the so-called religious issue is necessarily and properly thechief topic here tonight, I want to emphasize from the outset that I believethat we have far more critical issues in the 1960 campaign; the spreadof Communist influence, until it now festers only 90 miles from the coastof Florida -- the humiliating treatment of our President and Vice Presidentby those who no longer respect our power -- the hungry children I saw inWest Virginia, the old people who cannot pay their doctors bills, the familiesforced to give up their farms -- an America with too many slums, with toofew schools, and too late to the moon and outer space. These are the realissues which should decide this campaign. And they are not religious issues-- for war and hunger and ignorance and despair know no religious barrier. But because I am a Catholic, and no Catholic has ever been elected President,the real issues in this campaign have been obscured -- perhaps deliberately,in some quarters less responsible than this. So it is apparently necessaryfor me to state once again -- not what kind of church I believe in, forthat should be important only tome -- but what kind of America Ibelieve in. I believe in an America where the separation of church and state isabsolute; where no Catholic prelate would tell the President-- shouldhe be Catholic -- how to act, and no Protestant minister would tell hisparishioners for whom to vote; where no church or church school is grantedany public funds or political preference, and where no man is denied publicoffice merely because his religion differs from the President who mightappoint him, or the people who might elect him. I believe in an America that is officially neither Catholic, Protestantnor Jewish; where no public official either requests or accept instructionson public policy from the Pope, the National Council of Churches or anyother ecclesiastical source; where no religious body seeks to impose itswill directly or indirectly upon the general populace or the public actsof its officials, and where religious liberty is so indivisible that anact against one church is treated as an act against all.  For while this year it may be a Catholic against whom the finger ofsuspicion is pointed, in other years it has been -- and may someday beagain -- a Jew, or a Quaker, or a Unitarian, or a Baptist. It was Virginia'sharassment of Baptist preachers, for example, that led to Jefferson's statuteof religious freedom. Today, I may be the victim, but tomorrow it may beyou -- until the whole fabric of our harmonious society is ripped apartat a time of great national peril.  Finally, I believe in an America where religious intolerance will somedayend, where all men and all churches are treated as equals, where everyman has the same right to attend or not to attend the church of his choice,where there is no Catholic vote, no anti-Catholic vote, no bloc votingof any kind, and where Catholics, Protestants, and Jews, at both the layand the pastoral levels, will refrain from those attitudes of disdain anddivision which have so often marred their works in the past, and promoteinstead the American ideal of brotherhood.  That is the kind of America in which I believe. And it represents thekind of Presidency in which I believe, a great office that must be neitherhumbled by making it the instrument of any religious group nor tarnishedby arbitrarily withholding it -- its occupancy from the members of any one religiousgroup. I believe in a President whose views on religion are his own privateaffair, neither imposed upon him by the nation, nor imposed by the nationupon him I would not look with favor upon a President working to subvert thefirst amendment's guarantees of religious liberty; nor would our systemof checks and balances permit him to do so. And neither do I look withfavor upon those who would work to subvert Article VI of the Constitutionby requiring a religious test, even by indirection. For if they disagreewith that safeguard, they should be openly working to repeal it.  I want a Chief Executive whose public acts are responsible to all andobligated to none, who can attend any ceremony, service, or dinner hisoffice may appropriately require of him to fulfill; and whose fulfillmentof his Presidential office is not limited or conditioned by any religiousoath, ritual, or obligation.  This is the kind of America I believe in -- and this is the kind ofAmerica I fought for in the South Pacific, and the kind my brother diedfor in Europe. No one suggested then that we might have a divided loyalty,that we did not believe in liberty, or that we belonged to a disloyal groupthat threatened -- I quote -- "the freedoms for which our forefathers died."  And in fact this is the kind of America for which our forefathers diddie when they fled here to escape religious test oaths that denied office tomembers of less favored churches -- when they fought for the Constitution,the Bill of Rights, the Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom -- and whenthey fought at the shrine I visited today, the Alamo. For side by sidewith Bowie and Crockett died Fuentes, and McCafferty, and Bailey, and Badillo,and Carey -- but no one knows whether they were Catholics or not. For therewas no religious test there.  I ask you tonight to follow in that tradition -- to judge me on thebasis of 14 years in the Congress, on my declared stands against an Ambassadorto the Vatican, against unconstitutional aid to parochial schools, andagainst any boycott of the public schools -- which I attended myself. Andinstead of doing this, do not judge me on the basis of these pamphletsand publications we all have seen that carefully select quotations outof context from the statements of Catholic church leaders, usually in othercountries, frequently in other centuries, and rarely relevant to any situationhere. And always omitting, of course, the statement of the American Bishopsin 1948 which strongly endorsed Church-State separation, and which morenearly reflects the views of almost every American Catholic.  I do not consider these other quotations binding upon my public acts.Why should you?  But let me say, with respect to other countries, that I am wholly opposedto the State being used by any religious group, Catholic or Protestant,to compel, prohibit, or prosecute the free exercise of any other religion.And that goes for any persecution, at any time, by anyone, in any country.And I hope that you and I condemn with equal fervor those nations whichdeny their Presidency to Protestants, and those which deny it to Catholics.And rather than cite the misdeeds of those who differ, I would also citethe record of the Catholic Church in such nations as France and Ireland,and the independence of such statesmen as De Gaulle and Adenauer.  But let me stress again that these are my views.  For contrary to common newspaper usage, I am not the Catholic candidatefor President.  I am the Democratic Party's candidate for President who happens alsoto be a Catholic.  I do not speak for my church on public matters; and the church doesnot speak for me. Whatever issue may come before me as President, if Ishould be elected, on birth control, divorce, censorship, gamblingor any other subject, I will make my decision in accordance with theseviews -- in accordance with what my conscience tells me to be in the nationalinterest, and without regard to outside religious pressure or dictates.And no power or threat of punishment could cause me to decide otherwise.  But if the time should ever come -- and I do not concede any conflictto be remotely possible -- when my office would require me to either violatemy conscience or violate the national interest, then I would resign theoffice; and I hope any conscientious public servant would do likewise.  But I do not intend to apologize for these views to my critics of eitherCatholic or Protestant faith; nor do I intend to disavow either my viewsor my church in order to win this election.  If I should lose on the real issues, I shall return to my seat in theSenate, satisfied that I'd tried my best and was fairly judged.  But if this election is decided on the basis that 40 million Americanslost their chance of being President on the day they were baptized, thenit is the whole nation that will be the loser, in the eyes of Catholicsand non-Catholics around the world, in the eyes of history, and in theeyes of our own people.  But if, on the other hand, I should win this election, then I shalldevote every effort of mind and spirit to fulfilling the oath of the Presidency-- practically identical, I might add, with the oath I have taken for 14years in the Congress. For without reservation, I can,"solemnlyswear that I will faithfully execute the office of President of the UnitedStates, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect, and defendthe Constitution -- so help me God.   Audio Source: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Also in this database: John F. Kennedy - Q&A Following the Houston Ministerial Association Address U.S. Copyright Status:  