Out of the agony and travail of economic America the Committee forIndustrial Organization was born. To millions of Americans exploited without stint bycorporate industry and socially debased beyond the understanding of the fortunate, itscoming was as welcomed as the dawn to the night watcher. To a lesser group of Americans,infinitely more fortunately situated, blessed with larger quantities of the worldsgoods and insolent in their assumption of privilege, its coming was heralded as aharbinger of ill, sinister of purpose, of unclean methods and non-virtuous objectives. Butthe Committee for Industrial Organizations is here. It is now henceforth a definiteinstrumentality, destined greatly to influence the lives of our people and the internaland external course of the republic. This is true only because the purposes and objectives of theCommittee for Industrial Organization find economic, social, political and moraljustification in the hearts of the millions who are its members and the millions more whosupport it. The organization and constant onward sweep of this movement exemplifies theresentment of the many toward the selfishness, greed and the neglect of the few. The workers of the nation were tired of waiting for corporateindustry to right their economic wrongs, to alleviate their social agony and to grant themtheir political rights. Despairing of fair treatment, they resolved to do something forthemselves. They, therefore, have organized a new labor movement, conceived within theprinciples of the national bill of rights and committed to the proposition that theworkers are free to assemble in their own forums, voice their own grievances, declaretheir own hopes and contract on even terms with modern industry for the sale of their onlymaterial possession -- their labor. The Committee for Industrial Organization has a numerical enrollmentof 3,718,000 members. It has 32 affiliated national and international unions. Of thisnumber 11 unions account for 2,765,000 members. This group is organized in the textile,auto, garment, lumber, rubber, electrical manufacturing, power, steel, coal and transportindustries. The remaining membership exists in the maritime, oil production and refining,ship building, leather, chemical, retail, meat packing, vegetable canning, metalliferousmining, miscellaneous manufacturing, agricultural labor, and service and miscellaneousindustries. Some 200,000 workers are organized into 507 chartered local unions not yetattached to a national industrial union. This record bespeaks progress. It is a development without precedentin our own country. Some of this work was accomplished with the enlightened cooperation orthe tolerant acquiescence of employers who recognized that a new labor movement was beingforged and who were not disposed, in any event, to flout the law of the land. On the otherhand, much of this progress was made in the face of violent and deadly opposition whichreached its climax in the slaughter of workers paralleling the massacres of Ludlow andHomestead. In the steel industry the corporations generally have acceptedcollective bargaining and negotiated wage agreements with the Committee for IndustrialOrganization. Eighty-five per cent of the industry is thus under contract and a peacefulrelationship exits between the management and the workers. Written wage contracts havebeen negotiated with 399 steel companies covering 510,000 men. One thousand thirty-onelocal lodges in 700 communities have been organized. Five of the corporations in the steel industry elected to resistcollective bargaining and undertook to destroy the steel workers' union. These companiesfilled their plants with industrial spies, assembled depots of guns and gas bombs,established barricades, controlled their communities with armed thugs, leased the policepower of cities and mobilized the military power of a state to guard them against theintrusion of collective bargaining within their plants. During this strike 18 steel workers were either shot to death or hadtheir brains clubbed out by police, or armed thugs in the pay of the steel companies. InChicago, Mayor Kelly's police force was successful in killing ten strikers before theycould escape the fury of the police, shooting eight of them in the back. One hundred sixtystrikers were maimed and injured by police clubs, riot guns and gas bombs and werehospitalized. Hundreds of strikers were arrested, jailed, treated with brutalitywhile incarcerated and harassed by succeeding litigation. None but strikers were murdered,gassed, injured, jailed or maltreated. No one had to die except the workers who werestanding for the right guaranteed them by the Congress and written in the law. The infamous Governor Davey, of Ohio, successful in the lastelection because of his reiterated promises of fair treatment to labor, used the militarypower of the Commonwealth on the side of the Republican Steel Company and the YoungstownSheet and Tube Company. Nearly half of the staggering military expenditure incident to thecrushing of this strike in Ohio was borne by the federal government through the allocationof financial aid to the military establishment of the state. The steel workers have now buried their dead, while the widows weepand watch their orphaned children become objects of public charity. The murder of theseunarmed men has never been publicly rebuked by any authoritative officer of the state orfederal government. Some of them, in extenuation, plead lack of jurisdiction, but murderas a crime against the moral code can always be rebuked without regard to the niceties oflegalistic jurisdiction by those who profess to be the keepers of the public conscience. Shortly after Kelly's police force in Chicago had indulged in theirbloody orgy, Kelly came to Washington looking for political patronage. That patronage wasforthcoming and Kelly must believe that the killing of the strikers is no liability inpartisan politics. Meanwhile, the steel puppet Davey is still Governor of Ohio, but notfor long I think - not for long. The people of Ohio may be relied upon to mete ourpolitical justice to one who has betrayed his state, outraged the public conscience andbesmirched the public honor. While the men of the steel industry were going through blood and gasin defense of their rights and their homes and their families, elsewhere on the far-flungC.I.O. front the hosts of labor were advancing and intelligent and permanent progress wasbeing made. In scores of industries plant after plant and company after company werenegotiating sensible working agreements. The men in the steel industry who sacrificed their all were normerely aiding their fellows at home but were adding strength to the cause of theircomrades in all industry. Labor was marching toward the goal of industrial democracy andcontributing constructively toward a more rational arrangement of our domestic economy. Labor does not see industrial strife. It wants peace, but a peacewith justice. In the long struggle for labors rights it has been patient andforbearing. Sabotage and destruction syndicalism have had no part in the American labormovement. Workers have kept faith in American institutions. Most of the conflicts, whichhave occurred have been when labors right to live has been challenged and denied. If there is to be peace in our industrial life let the employerrecognize his obligation to his employees -- at least to the degree set forth in existingstatutes. Ordinary problems affecting wages, hours, and working conditions, in mostinstances, will quickly respond to negotiation in the council room. The United States Chamber of Commerce, the National Association ofManufacturers, and similar groups representing industry and financial interests, arerendering a disservice to the American people in their attempts to frustrate theorganization of labor and in their refusal to accept collective bargaining as one of oureconomic institutions. These groups are encouraging a systematic organization of vigilantegroups to fight unionization under the sham pretext of local interests. They equip thesevigilantes with tin hats, wooden clubs, gas masks and lethal weapons and train them in thearts of brutality and oppression. They bring in snoops, finks, hatchet gangs andChowderhead Cohens to infest their plants and disturb the communities. Fascist organizations have been launched and financed under theshabby pretext that the C.I.O. movement is communistic. The real breeders of discontentand alien doctrines of government and philosophies subversive of good citizenship are suchas these who take the law into their own hands. No tin-hat brigade of goose-stepping vigilantes or bibble-babblingmob of blackguarding and corporation paid scoundrels will prevent the onward march oflabor, or divert its purpose to play its natural and rational part in the development ofthe economic, political and social life of our nation. Unionization, as opposed to communism, presupposes the relation ofemployment; it is based upon the wage system and it recognizes fully and unreservedly theinstitution of private property and the right to investment profit. It is upon the fullerdevelopment of collective bargaining, the wider expansion of the labor movement, theincreased influence of labor in our national councils, that the perpetuity of ourdemocratic institutions must largely depend. The organized workers of America, free in their industrial life,conscious partners in production, secure in their homes and enjoying a decent standard ofliving, will prove the finest bulwark against the intrusion of alien doctrines ofgovernment.  Do those who have hatched this foolish cry of communism in theC.I.O. fear the increased influence of labor in our democracy? Do they fear its influencewill be cast on the side of shorter hours, a better system of distributed employment,better homes for the under-privileged, social security for the aged, a fairer distributionof the national income? Certainly the workers that are being organized want a voice in thedetermination of these objectives of social justice. Certainly labor wants a fairer sharein the national income. Assuredly labor wants a larger participation in increasedproductive efficiency. Obviously the population is entitled to participate in the fruitsof the genius of our men of achievement in the field of the material sciences. Labor has suffered just as our farm population has suffered from aviciously unequal distribution of the national income. In the exploitation of both classesof workers has been the source of panic and depression, and upon the economic welfare ofboth rests the best assurance of a sound and permanent prosperity. In this connection let me call attention to the propaganda whichsome of our industrialists are carrying on among the farmers. By pamphlets in the milkcans or attached to machinery and in countless other ways of direct and indirect approach,the farmers of the nation are being told that the increased price of farm machinery andfarm supplies is due to the rising wage level brought about by the Committee forIndustrial Organization. And yet it is the industrial millions of this country whoconstitute the substantial market for all agricultural products. The interest of the two groups are mutually dependent. It is whenthe pay roll goes down that the farmer's realization is diminished, so that his loansbecome overdue at the bank and the arrival of the tax collector is awaited with fear. Onthe other hand it is the prosperity of the farmer that quickness the tempo ofmanufacturing activities and brings buying power to the millions of urban and industrialworkers. As we view the years that have passed this has always been true andit becomes increasingly imperative that the farm population and the millions of workers inindustry must learn to combine their strength for the attainment of mutual and desirableobjectives and at the same time learn to guard themselves against the sinister propagandaof those who would divide and exploit them. Under the banner of the Committee for Industrial OrganizationAmerican labor is on the march. Its objectives today are those it had in the beginning: tostrive for the unionization of our unorganized millions of workers and for the acceptanceof collective bargaining as a recognized American institution. It seeks peace with the industrial world. It seeks cooperation andmutuality of effort with the agricultural population. It would avoid strikes. It wouldhave its rights determined under the law by the peaceful negotiations and contractrelationships that are supposed to characterize American commercial life. Until an aroused public opinion demands that employers accept thatrule, labor has no recourse but to surrender its rights or struggle for their realizationwith its own economic power. The objectives of this movement are not political in a partisansense. Yet it is true that a political party which seeks the support of labor and makespledges of good faith to labor must, in equity and good conscience, keep that faith andredeem those pledges. The spectacle of august and dignified members of Congress, servantsof the people and agents of the republic, skulking in hallways and closets, hiding theirfaces in a party caucus to prevent a quorum from acting upon a labor measure, is one thatemphasizes the perfidy of politicians and blasts the confidence of labor's millions inpolitician's promises and statesmen's vows. Labor next year cannot avoid the necessity of a political assay ofthe work and. deeds of its so-called friends and its political beneficiaries. It mustdetermine who are its friends in the arena of politics as elsewhere. It feels that itscause is just and that its friends should not view its struggle with neutral detachment orintone constant criticism of its activities. Those who chant their praises of democracy but who lose no chance todrive their knives into labor's defenseless back must feel the weight of labor's woe evenas its open adversaries must ever feel the thrust of labor's power. Labor, like Israel, has many sorrows. Its women weep for theirfallen and they lament for the future of the children of the race. It ill behooves one whohas supped at labor's table and who has been sheltered in labor's house to curse withequal fervor and fine impartiality both labor and its adversaries when they become lockedin deadly embrace. I repeat that labor seeks peace and guarantees its own loyalty, butthe voice of labor, insistent upon its rights, should not be annoying to the ears ofjustice or offensive to the conscience of the American people. Text Source: This version taken from John Llewellyn Lewis, The John L.Lewis papers, 1879-1969, published in 1979, by Microfilming Corporation of America:Sanford, N.C. Image Source: Wikipedia Copyright Status: Text = Uncertain. Image = Public domain.