[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio. (2)] [AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio. (2)] Thank you very much. On behalf of the great Empire State and the whole family of New York, let me thankyou for the great privilege of being able to address this convention. Please allow me toskip the stories and the poetry and the temptation to deal in nice but vague rhetoric. Letme instead use this valuable opportunity to deal immediately with the questions that shoulddetermine this election and that we all know are vital to the American people. Ten days ago, President Reagan admitted that although some people inthis country seemed to be doing well nowadays, others were unhappy, even worried, aboutthemselves, their families, and their futures. The President said that he didn't understandthat fear. He said, "Why, this country is a shining city on a hill." And the President is right. In many ways we are a shining city on a hill. But the hard truth is that not everyone is sharing in this city'ssplendor and glory. A shining city is perhaps all the President sees from the portico ofthe White House and the veranda of his ranch, where everyone seems to be doing well. Butthere's another city; there's another part to the shining the city; the part where somepeople can't pay their mortgages, and most young people can't afford one; where studentscan't afford the education they need, and middle-class parents watch the dreams they holdfor their children evaporate. In this part of the city there are more poor than ever, morefamilies in trouble, more and more people who need help but can't find it. Even worse:There are elderly people who tremble in the basements of the houses there. And there arepeople who sleep in the city streets, in the gutter, where the glitter doesn't show. Thereare ghettos where thousands of young people, without a job or an education, give theirlives away to drug dealers every day. There is despair, Mr. President, in the faces thatyou don't see, in the places that you don't visit in your shining city. In fact, Mr. President, this is a nation -- Mr. President you oughtto know that this nation is more a "Tale of Two Cities" than it is just a"Shining City on a Hill." Maybe, maybe, Mr. President, if you visited some more places; maybeif you went to Appalachia where some people still live in sheds; maybe if you went toLackawanna where thousands of unemployed steel workers wonder why we subsidized foreignsteel. Maybe -- Maybe, Mr. President, if you stopped in at a shelter in Chicago and spoke tothe homeless there; maybe, Mr. President, if you asked a woman who had been denied thehelp she needed to feed her children because you said you needed the money for a tax breakfor a millionaire or for a missile we couldn't afford to use. Maybe -- Maybe, Mr. President. But I'm afraid not. Because the truth is, ladies and gentlemen, that this is how wewere warned it would be. President Reagan told us from the very beginning that he believedin a kind of social Darwinism. Survival of the fittest. "Government can't doeverything," we were told, so it should settle for taking care of the strongand hope that economic ambition and charity will do the rest. Make the rich richer, andwhat falls from the table will be enough for the middle class and those who are tryingdesperately to work their way into the middle class. You know, the Republicans called it "trickle-down" when Hoover triedit. Now they call it "supply side." But it's the same shining city for those relative fewwho are lucky enough to live in its good neighborhoods. But for the people who areexcluded, for the people who are locked out, all they can do is stare from adistance at that city's glimmering towers. It's an old story. It's as old as our history. The differencebetween Democrats and Republicans has always been measured in courage and confidence. TheRepublicans -- The Republicans believe that the wagon train will not make it to the frontier unless some ofthe old, some of the young, some of the weak are left behind by the side of the trail. "The strong" -- "The strong," they tell us, "will inherit the land." We Democrats believe in something else. We democrats believe that we can make it all the way with the whole family intact, and we have more than once. Ever since Franklin Roosevelt lifted himself from his wheelchair tolift this nation from its knees -- wagon train after wagon train -- to new frontiers ofeducation, housing, peace; the whole family aboard, constantly reaching out to extend andenlarge that family; lifting them up into the wagon on the way; blacks and Hispanics, andpeople of every ethnic group, and native Americans -- all those struggling to build theirfamilies and claim some small share of America. For nearly 50 years we carried them all to new levels of comfort, and security, and dignity, even affluence. And remember this, some of us in this room today are here only because this nation had that kind of confidence. And it would be wrong to forget that.  So, here we are at this convention to remind ourselves where we come from and to claim the future for ourselves and for our children. Today our great Democratic Party, which has saved this nation fromdepression, from fascism, from racism, from corruption, is called upon to do it again --this time to save the nation from confusion and division, from the threat of eventualfiscal disaster, and most of all from the fear of a nuclear holocaust.  That's not going to be easy. Mo Udall is exactly right -- it won't be easy. And in order to succeed, we must answer our opponent's polished andappealing rhetoric with a more telling reasonableness and rationality. We must win this case on the merits. We must get the American publicto look past the glitter, beyond the showmanship to the reality, the hard substance ofthings. And we'll do it not so much with speeches that sound good as with speechesthat are good and sound; not so much with speeches that will bring people to their feet aswith speeches that will bring people to their senses. We must make -- We must make the American people hear our"Tale of Two Cities." We must convince them that we don't have to settle for twocities, that we can have one city, indivisible, shining for all of its people. Now, we will have no chance to do that if what comes out of thisconvention is a babel of arguing voices. If that's what's heard throughout the campaign,dissident sounds from all sides, we will have no chance to tell our message. To succeedwe will have to surrender some small parts of our individual interests, to build a platform that wecan all stand on, at once, and comfortably -- proudly singing out. We need -- We need a platform we can all agree to so that we can sing out the truth for the nation tohear, in chorus, its logic so clear and commanding that no slick Madison Avenue commercial, no amount ofgeniality, no martial music will be able to muffle the sound of the truth. And we Democratsmust unite. We Democrats must unite so that the entire nation can unite, becausesurely the Republicans won't bring this country together. Their policies divide the nationinto the lucky and the left-out, into the royalty and the rabble. The Republicans arewilling to treat that division as victory. They would cut this nation in half, into thosetemporarily better off and those worse off than before, and they would call that divisionrecovery. Now, we should not -- we should not be embarrassed or dismayed or chagrinedif the process of unifying is difficult, even wrenching at times. Remember that, unlikeany other Party, we embrace men and women of every color, every creed, every orientation,every economic class. In our family are gathered everyone from the abject poor of EssexCounty in New York, to the enlightened affluent of the gold coasts at both ends of thenation. And in between is the heart of our constituency -- the middle class, the peoplenot rich enough to be worry-free, but not poor enough to be on welfare; the middle class --those people who work for a living because they have to, not because some psychiatristtold them it was a convenient way to fill the interval between birth and eternity. Whitecollar and blue collar. Young professionals. Men and women in small business desperate forthe capital and contracts that they need to prove their worth. We speak for the minorities who have not yet entered the mainstream.We speak for ethnics who want to add their culture to the magnificent mosaic that isAmerica. We speak -- We speak for women who are indignant that this nation refuses to etchinto its governmental commandments the simple rule "thou shalt not sin againstequality," a rule so simple --  I was going to say, and I perhaps dare not but I will. It's a commandment so simple it can be spelled in three letters: E.R.A. We speak -- We speak for young people demanding an education and a future. Wespeak for senior citizens. We speak for senior citizens who are terrorized by the idea that their only security, theirSocial Security, is being threatened. We speak for millions of reasoning people fightingto preserve our environment from greed and from stupidity. And we speak for reasonablepeople who are fighting to preserve our very existence from a macho intransigence thatrefuses to make intelligent attempts to discuss the possibility of nuclear holocaust withour enemy. They refuse. They refuse, because they believe we can pile missiles so highthat they will pierce the clouds and the sight of them will frighten our enemies intosubmission. Now we're proud of this diversity as Democrats. We're grateful forit. We don't have to manufacture it the way the Republicans will next month in Dallas, bypropping up mannequin delegates on the convention floor. But we, while we're proud of thisdiversity, we pay a price for it. The different people that we represent havedifferent points of view. And sometimes they compete and even debate, and even argue.That's what our primaries were all about. But now the primaries are over and it is time,when we pick our candidates and our platform here, to lock arms and move into this campaigntogether. If you need any more inspiration to put some small part of your own differenceaside to create this consensus, then all you need to do is to reflect on what the Republicanpolicy of divide and cajole has done to this land since 1980. Now the President has asked the American people to judge him on whether or not he'sfulfilled the promises he made four years ago. I believe, as Democrats, we ought toaccept that challenge. And just for a moment let us consider what he has said and whathe's done. Inflation -- Inflation is down since 1980, but not because of the supply-side miraclepromised to us by the President. Inflation was reduced the old-fashioned way: with arecession, the worst since 1932. Now how did we -- We could have brought inflation down that way. How did hedo it? 55,000 bankruptcies; two years of massive unemployment; 200,000 farmers and ranchers forced off the land; more homeless -- more homeless than at any time sincethe Great Depression in 1932; more hungry, in this world of enormous affluence, theUnited States of America, more hungry; more poor, most of them women. And -- And he paid oneother thing, a nearly 200 billion dollar deficit threatening our future. Now, we must make the American people understand this deficit becausethey don't. The President's deficit is a direct and dramatic repudiation of his promise in 1980 tobalance the budget by 1983. How large is it? The deficit is the largest in the history ofthe universe. It -- President Carter's last budget had a deficit less than one-third of thisdeficit. It is a deficit that, according to the President's own fiscal adviser, may grow to as much 300 billion dollars a year for "as far as the eye can see." And, ladies and gentlemen, it is a debt so large -- that is almostone-half of the money we collect from the personal income tax each year goes just to pay the interest. It is amortgage on our children's future that can be paid only in pain and that could bring thisnation to its knees. Now don't take my word for it -- I'm a Democrat. Ask the Republican investment bankers on Wall Street what they thinkthe chances of this recovery being permanent are. You see, if they're not too embarrassedto tell you the truth, they'll say that they're appalled and frightened by thePresident's deficit. Ask them what they think of our economy, now that it's been drivenby the distorted value of the dollar back to its colonial condition. Now we're exportingagricultural products and importing manufactured ones. Ask those Republican investmentbankers what they expect the rate of interest to be a year from now. And ask them -- if theydare tell you the truth -- you'll learn from them, what they predict for the inflation ratea year from now, because of the deficit. Now, how important is this question of the deficit. Think about it practically: What chance would the Republicancandidate have had in 1980 if he had told the American people that he intended to pay forhis so-called economic recovery with bankruptcies, unemployment, more homeless, morehungry, and the largest government debt known to humankind? If he had told the voters in 1980 that truth, would American voters havesigned the loan certificate for him on Election Day? Of course not! That was an electionwon under false pretenses. It was won with smoke and mirrors and illusions. And that's thekind of recovery we have now as well. But what about foreign policy? They said that they would make us andthe whole world safer. They say they have. By creating the largest defense budget inhistory, one that even they now admit is excessive -- by escalating to a frenzy the nucleararms race; by incendiary rhetoric; by refusing to discuss peace with our enemies; by theloss of 279 young Americans in Lebanon in pursuit of a plan and a policy that no one canfind or describe. We give money to Latin American governments that murder nuns, andthen we lie about it. We have been less than zealous in support of our only real friend --it seems to me, in the Middle East -- the one democracy there, our flesh and bloodally, the state of Israel. Our -- Our policy -- Our foreign policy drifts with no real direction, other than anhysterical commitment to an arms race that leads nowhere -- if we're lucky. And if we'renot, it could lead us into bankruptcy or war. Of course we must have a strong defense! Of course Democrats are for a strong defense. Of course Democratsbelieve that there are times that we must stand and fight. And we have. Thousands of ushave paid for freedom with our lives. But always -- when this country has been at its best-- our purposes were clear. Now they're not. Now our allies are as confused as our enemies.Now we have no real commitment to our friends or to our ideals -- not to human rights, notto the refuseniks, not to Sakharov, not to Bishop Tutu and the others struggling forfreedom in South Africa. We -- We have in the last few years spent more than we can afford. We havepounded our chests and made bold speeches. But we lost 279 young Americans in Lebanon andwe live behind sand bags in Washington. How can anyone say that we are safer, stronger, orbetter? That -- That is the Republican record. That its disastrous quality is not more fully understood by theAmerican people I can only attribute to the President's amiability and the failure by someto separate the salesman from the product. And, now -- now -- now it's up to us. Now it's upto you and to me to make the case to America. And to remind Americans that if they are nothappy with all that the President has done so far, they should consider how much worse it willbe if he is left to his radical proclivities for another four years unrestrained.Unrestrained. Now, if -- if July -- if July brings back Ann Gorsuch Burford -- what can we expect ofDecember? Where would -- Where would another four years take us? Where would four years more take us? Howmuch larger will the deficit be? How much deeper the cuts in programs for the strugglingmiddle class and the poor to limit that deficit? How high will the interest rates be? Howmuch more acid rain killing our forests and fouling our lakes? And, ladies and gentlemen, please think of this -- the nation must think of this: What kind of Supreme Court will we have? Please.  We -- We must askourselves what kind of court and country will be fashioned by the man who believes inhaving government mandate people's religion and morality; the man who believes that trees pollute the environment; the manthat believes that -- that the laws against discrimination against people go too far; a man whothreatens Social Security and Medicaid and help for the disabled. How high will we pilethe missiles? How much deeper will the gulf be between us and our enemies? And, ladies andgentlemen, will four years more make meaner the spirit ofthe American people? This election will measure the record of the past four years. But more than that, it will answer the question of what kind of people we want to be. We Democrats still have a dream. We still believe in this nation'sfuture. And this is our answer to the question. This is our credo: We believe in only the government we need, but we insist on all thegovernment we need. We believe in a government that is characterized by fairness andreasonableness, a reasonableness that goes beyond labels, that doesn't distort or promiseto do things that we know we can't do. We believe in a government strong enough to use wordslike "love" and "compassion" and smart enough to convert our noblestaspirations into practical realities. We believe in encouraging the talented, but webelieve that while survival of the fittest may be a good working description of theprocess of evolution, a government of humans should elevate itself to a higher order. We -- Our -- Our government -- Our government should be able to rise to the level where it canfill the gaps that are left by chance or by a wisdom we don't fully understand. We would rather havelaws written by the patron of this great city, the man called the "world's mostsincere Democrat," St. Francis of Assisi, than laws written by Darwin. We believe -- We believe as Democrats, that a society as blessed asours, the most affluent democracy in the world's history, one that can spend trillions oninstruments of destruction, ought to be able to help the middle class in its struggle,ought to be able to find work for all who can do it, room at the table, shelter for thehomeless, care for the elderly and infirm, and hope for the destitute. And we proclaim asloudly as we can the utter insanity of nuclear proliferation and the need for a nuclearfreeze, if only to affirm the simple truth that peace is better than war because life isbetter than death. We believe in firm -- We believe in firm but fair law and order.  We believe proudly in theunion movement.  We believe in a -- We believe -- We believe in privacy for people, openness by government. We believe incivil rights, and we believe in human rights.  We believe in a single -- We believe in a single fundamental idea thatdescribes better than most textbooks and any speech that I could write what a propergovernment should be: the idea of family, mutuality, the sharing of benefits and burdensfor the good of all, feeling one another's pain, sharing one another's blessings -- reasonably, honestly, fairly, without respect to race, or sex, or geography, or politicalaffiliation. We believe we must be the family of America, recognizing that at theheart of the matter we are bound one to another, that the problems of a retired schoolteacher in Duluth are our problems; that the future of the child -- that the future of the child in Buffalo is our future; that the struggle of a disabled man in Boston to survive and live decently is ourstruggle; that the hunger of a woman in Little Rock is our hunger; that the failureanywhere to provide what reasonably we might, to avoid pain, is our failure. Now for 50 years -- for 50 years we Democrats created a better futurefor our children, using traditional Democratic principles as a fixed beacon, giving usdirection and purpose, but constantly innovating, adapting to new realities: Roosevelt'salphabet programs Democrats did it -- Democrats did it and Democrats can do it again.We can build a future that deals with our deficit. Remember this, that 50 years ofprogress under our principles never cost us what the last four years of stagnation have.And we can deal with the deficit intelligently, by shared sacrifice, with all parts ofthe nation's family contributing, building partnerships with the private sector, providinga sound defense without depriving ourselves of what we need to feed our children and carefor our people. We can have a future that provides for all the young of the present,by marrying common sense and compassion.  We know we can, because we did it fornearly 50 years before 1980. And we can do it again, if we do not forget -- if we do not forgetthat this entire nation has profited by these progressive principles; that they helpedlift up generations to the middle class and higher; that they gave us a chance to work, to go tocollege, to raise a family, to own a house, to be secure in our old age and, before that,to reach heights that our own parents would not have dared dream of. That struggle to live with dignity is the real story of the shiningcity. And it's a story, ladies and gentlemen, that I didn't read in a book, or learn in aclassroom. I saw it and lived it, like many of you. I watched a small man with thickcalluses on both his hands work 15 and 16 hours a day. I saw him once literally bleed from thebottoms of his feet, a man who came here uneducated, alone, unable to speak the language,who taught me all I needed to know about faith and hard work by the simple eloquence ofhis example. I learned about our kind of democracy from my father. And I learned aboutour obligation to each other from him and from my mother. They asked only for a chance towork and to make the world better for their children, and they -- they asked to be protected inthose moments when they would not be able to protect themselves. This nation and thisnation's government did that for them. And that they were able to build a family and live in dignity and see one of their children go from behind their little grocery store in South Jamaica on the other side of the tracks where he was born, to occupy the highest seat, in the greatest State, in the greatest nation, in the only world we would know, is an ineffably beautiful tributeto the democratic process. And -- And ladies and gentlemen, on January 20, 1985, it will happenagain -- only on a much, much grander scale. We will have a new President of the UnitedStates, a Democrat born not to the blood of kings but to the blood of pioneers andimmigrants. And we will have America's first woman Vice President, the child ofimmigrants, and she -- she -- she will open with one magnificent stroke, a whole new frontierfor the United States. Now, it will happen. It will happen if we make it happen; if you and I make ithappen. And I ask you now, ladies and gentlemen, brothers and sisters, forthe good of all of us, for the love of this great nation, for the family of America, forthe love of God: Please, make this nation remember how futures are built. Thank you and God bless you.  Also in this database:Jesse Jackson's 1984 Democratic National Convention Address U.S. Copyright Status: Text