*Mr. Schieffer: Good evening from the campus of Lynn University here in Boca Raton, Florida. This is the fourth and last debate of the 2012 campaign, brought to you by the Commission on Presidential Debates. This one is on foreign policy. I'm Bob Schieffer of CBS News. The questions are mine and I have not shared them with the candidates or their aides. The audience has taken a vow of silence -- no applause, no reaction of any kind -- except right now, when we welcome President Barack Obama and Governor Mitt Romney.* Gentlemen, your campaigns have agreed to certain rules, and they are simple. Theyve asked me to divide the evening into segments. I'll pose a question at the beginning of each segment. You will each have two minutes to respond, and then we will have a general discussion until we move to the next segment. Tonights debate, as both of you know, comes on the 50th anniversary of the night that President Kennedy told the world that the Soviet Union had installed nuclear missiles in Cuba, perhaps the closest we've ever come to nuclear war. And it is a sobering reminder that every President faces at some point an unexpected threat to our national security from abroad. So lets begin. The first segment is the challenge of a changing Middle East and the new face of terrorism. I'm going to put this into two segments, so youll have two topic questions within this one segment on the subject. The first question -- and it concerns Libya. The controversy over what happened there continues. Four Americans are dead, including an American Ambassador. Questions remain of what happened: What caused it? Was it spontaneous? Was it an intelligence failure? Was it a policy failure? Was there an attempt to mislead people about what really happened? Governor Romney, you said this was an example of an American policy in the Middle East that is unraveling before our very eyes. I'd like to hear each of you give your thoughts on that. Governor Romney, you won the toss -- you go first. Governor Romney: This is obviously an area of great concern to the entire world, and to America in particular, which is to see a complete change in the structure and the environment in the Middle East. With the Arab Spring came a great deal of hope that there would be a change towards more moderation, an opportunity for greater participation on the part of women in public life and in economic life in the Middle East. But instead we've seen in nation after nation a number of disturbing events. Of course, we see in Syria, 30,000 civilians having been killed by the military there. We see in Libya, an attack, apparently by -- I think we know now -- by terrorists of some kind against our people there, four people dead. Our hearts and minds go to them. Mali has been taken over -- the northern part of Mali by al Qaeda-type individuals. We have in Egypt a Muslim Brotherhood president. And so what we're seeing is a pretty dramatic reversal of the kind of hopes we had for that region. Of course, the greatest threat of all is Iran, four years closer to a nuclear weapon. And we're going to have to recognize that we have to do as the President has done -- I congratulate him on taking out Osama bin Laden and going after the leadership in al Qaeda. But we can't kill our way out of this mess. We're going to have to put in place a very comprehensive and robust strategy to help the world of Islam and other parts of the world reject this radical, violent extremism, which is -- its certainly not on the run. Its certainly not hiding. This is a group that is now involved in 10 or 12 countries. And it presents an enormous threat to our friends, to the world, to America long term, and we must have a comprehensive strategy to help reject this kind of extremism. Mr. Schieffer: Mr. President. President Obama: Well, my first job as Commander-in-Chief, Bob, is to keep the American people safe. And that's what we've done over the last four years. We ended the war in Iraq, refocused our attention on those who actually killed us on 9/11. And as a consequence, al Qaedas core leadership has been decimated. In addition, we're now able to transition out of Afghanistan in a responsible way, making sure that Afghans take responsibility for their own security. And that allows us also to rebuild alliances and make friends around the world to combat future threats. Now, with respect to Libya, as I indicated in the last debate, when we received that phone call, I immediately made sure that, number one, we did everything we could to secure those Americans who were still in harms way; number two, that we would investigate exactly what happened; and number three, most importantly, that we would go after those who killed Americans and we would bring them to justice. And thats exactly what were going to do. But I think its important to step back and think about what happened in Libya. Now, keep in mind that I and Americans took leadership in organizing an international coalition that made sure that we were able to -- without putting troops on the ground, at the cost of less than what we spent in two weeks in Iraq -- liberate a country that had been under the yoke of dictatorship for 40 years, got rid of a despot who had killed Americans. And, as a consequence, despite this tragedy, you had tens of thousands of Libyans, after the events in Benghazi, marching and saying, America is our friend. We stand with them. Now, that represents the opportunity we have to take advantage of. And, Governor Romney, Im glad that you agree that we have been successful in going after al Qaeda, but I have to tell you that your strategy previously has been one that has been all over the map, and is not designed to keep Americans safe or to build on the opportunities that exist in the Middle East. Governor Romney: The right course for us is to make sure that we go after the people who are leaders of these various anti-American groups and these jihadists, but also help the Muslim world. And how do we do that? A group of Arab scholars came together, organized by the U.N., to look at how we can help the world reject these terrorists. And the answer they came up with was this: One, more economic development. We should key our foreign aid, our direct foreign investment -- and that of our friends -- we should coordinate it to make sure that we push back and give them more economic development. Number two, better education. Number three, gender equality. Number four, the rule of law. We have to help these nations create civil societies. But whats been happening over the last couple of years is as weve watched this tumult in the Middle East, this rising tide of chaos occur, you see al Qaeda rushing in. You see other jihadist groups rushing in. And theyre throughout many nations in the Middle East. Its wonderful that Libya seems to be making some progress, despite this terrible tragedy. But next door, of course, we have Egypt -- Libya is 6 million population, Egypt 80 million population. We want to make sure that were seeing progress throughout the Middle East, with Mali now having North Mali taken over by al Qaeda; with Syria having Assad continuing to kill -- to murder his own people. This is a region in tumult. And of course, Iran on the path to a nuclear weapon -- weve got real problems in the region. Mr. Schieffer: Lets give the President a chance. President Obama: Governor Romney, Im glad that you recognize that al Qaeda is a threat, because a few months ago, when you were asked whats the biggest geopolitical threat facing America, you said Russia -- not al Qaeda -- you said Russia. And the 1980s are now calling to ask for their foreign policy back because the Cold War has been over for 20 years. But, Governor, when it comes to our foreign policy, you seem to want to import the foreign policies of the 1980s, just like the social policies of the 1950s, and the economic policies of the 1920s. You say that youre not interested in duplicating what happened in Iraq, but just a few weeks ago you said you think we should have more troops in Iraq right now. And the challenge we have -- I know you havent been in a position to actually execute foreign policy, but every time youve offered an opinion, youve been wrong. You said we should have gone into Iraq, despite the fact that there were no weapons of mass destruction. You said that we should still have troops in Iraq to this day. You indicated that we shouldnt be passing nuclear treaties with Russia, despite the fact that 71 senators -- Democrats and Republicans -- voted for it. Youve said that, first, we should not have a timeline in Afghanistan; then you said we should; now you say maybe, or it depends -- which means not only were you wrong, but you were also confusing and sending mixed messages both to our troops and our allies. So what we need to do with respect to the Middle East is strong, steady leadership, not wrong and reckless leadership that is all over the map. And unfortunately, that's the kinds of opinions that youve offered throughout this campaign, and it is not a recipe for American strength or keeping America safe over the long term. Mr. Schieffer: Im going to add a couple of minutes here to give you a chance to respond. Governor Romney: But I can say this -- that were talking about the Middle East and how to help the Middle East reject the kind of terrorism were seeing and the rising tide of tumult and confusion. And attacking me is not an agenda. Attacking me is not talking about how were going to deal with the challenges that exist in the Middle East and take advantage of the opportunity there and stem the tide of this violence. But Ill respond to a couple of the things you mentioned. First of all, Russia I indicated is a geopolitical foe, not a -- President Obama: Number one geopolitical -- Governor Romney: Number two, with regards to Iraq, you and I agreed, I believe, that there should have been a status of forces agreement. Did you -- President Obama: That's not true. Governor Romney: President Obama: No, what I -- what I would not have done is left 10,000 troops in Iraq that would tie us down. That certainly would not help us in the Middle East. Governor Romney: President Obama: You are -- Governor Romney: President Obama: He was -- Governor Romney: President Obama: Governor -- Governor Romney: President Obama: Governor -- Governor Romney: President Obama: This is just a few weeks ago. Governor Romney: President Obama: This is just a few weeks ago that you indicated that we should still have troops in Iraq. Governor Romney: President Obama: You made a major speech. Governor Romney: President Obama: Governor -- Governor Romney: President Obama: Governor, heres one thing -- Mr. Schieffer: Let him answer, please. President Obama: Heres one thing Ive learned as Commander-in-Chief. Youve got to be clear both to our allies and our enemies about where you stand and what you mean. Now, you just gave a speech a few weeks ago in which you said we should still have troops in Iraq. That is not a recipe for making sure that we are taking advantage of the opportunities and meeting the challenges of the Middle East. Now, it is absolutely true that we cannot just beat these challenges militarily. And so what Ive done, throughout my presidency and will continue to do, is, number one, make sure that these countries are supporting our counterterrorism efforts. Number two, make sure that they are standing by our interests in Israels security -- because it is a true friend and our greatest ally in the region. Number three, we do have to make sure that were protecting religious minorities and women because these countries cant develop unless all the population -- not just half of it -- is developing. Number four, we do have to develop their economic capabilities. But number five, the other thing that we have to do is recognize that we cant continue to do nation-building in these regions -- part of American leadership is making sure that were doing nation-building here at home. That will help us maintain the kind of American leadership that we need. Mr. Schieffer: Let me interject the second topic question in this segment about the Middle East and so on. And that is -- you both mentioned -- alluded to this, and that is Syria. The war in Syria has now spilled over into Lebanon. We have, what, more than a hundred people that were killed there in a bomb. There were demonstrations there, eight people dead. Mr. President, its been more than a year since you saw -- you told Assad he had to go. Since then, 30,000 Syrians have died. Weve had 300,000 refugees. The war goes on; hes still there. Should we reassess our policy and see if we can find a better way to influence events there, or is that even possible? And you go first, sir. President Obama: What weve done is organize the international community, saying Assad has to go. Weve mobilized sanctions against that government. We have made sure that they are isolated. We have provided humanitarian assistance, and we are helping the opposition organize. And were particularly interested in making sure that were mobilizing the moderate forces inside of Syria. But ultimately, Syrians are going to have to determine their own future. And so everything were doing, were doing in consultation with our partners in the region -- including Israel, which obviously has a huge interest in seeing what happens in Syria; coordinating with Turkey and other countries in the region that have a great interest in this. Now, what were seeing taking place in Syria is heartbreaking. And thats why we are going to do everything we can to make sure that we are helping the opposition. But we also have to recognize that for us to get more entangled militarily in Syria is a serious step. And we have to do so making absolutely certain that we know who we are helping, that were not putting arms in the hands of folks who eventually could turn them against us or our allies in the region. And I am confident that Assads days are numbered. But what we cant do is to simply suggest that, as Governor Romney at times has suggested, that giving heavy weapons, for example, to the Syrian opposition is a simple proposition that would lead us to be safer over the long term. Mr. Schieffer: Governor. Governor Romney: And finally, we dont want to have military involvement there. We dont want to get drawn in to a military conflict. And so the right course for us is working through our partners and with our own resources to identify responsible parties within Syria, organize them, bring them together in a form of, not government, a form of council that can take the lead in Syria, and then make sure they have the arms necessary to defend themselves. We do need to make sure that they dont have arms that get into the wrong hands, that those arms could be used to hurt us down the road. We need to make sure as well that we coordinate this effort with our allies, and particularly with Israel. But the Saudis and the Qatari and the Turks are all very concerned about this. Theyre willing to work with us. We need to have a very effective leadership effort in Syria, making sure that the insurgents there are armed and that the insurgents that become armed are people who will be the responsible parties. Recognize -- I believe that Assad must go. I believe he will go. But I believe we want to make sure that we have the relationships of friendship with the people that take his place, such that in the years to come, we see Syria as a friend and Syria as a responsible party in the Middle East. This is a critical opportunity for America. And what Im afraid of is weve watched over the past year or so, first the President saying, well, well let the U.N. deal with it and Assad -- excuse me -- Kofi Annan came in and said were going to try -- have a ceasefire. That didnt work. Then it looked to the Russians and said, lets see if you can do something. We should be playing the leadership role there -- not on the ground with military, but play the leadership role. Mr. Schieffer: All right. President Obama: We are playing the leadership role. We organized the Friends of Syria. We are mobilizing humanitarian support and support for the opposition. And we are making sure that those we help are those who will be friends of ours in the long term and friends of our allies in the region over the long term. But going back to Libya, because this is an example of how we make choices -- when we went into Libya, and we were able to immediately stop the massacre there because of the unique circumstances and the coalition that we had helped to organize, we also had to make sure that Muammar Qaddafi didnt stay there. And to the Governors credit, you supported us going into Libya and the coalition that we organized. But when it came time to making sure that Qaddafi did not stay in power, that he was captured, Governor, your suggestion was that this was mission creep, that this was mission muddle. Imagine if we had pulled out at that point. Muammar Qaddafi had more American blood on his hands than any individual other than Osama bin Laden, and so we were going to make sure that we finished the job. Thats part of the reason why the Libyans stand with us. But we did so in a careful, thoughtful way, making certain that we knew who we were dealing with; that those forces of moderation on the ground were ones that we could work with. And we have to take the same kind of steady, thoughtful leadership when it comes to Syria. Thats exactly what were doing. Mr. Schieffer: Governor, can I just ask you, would you go beyond what the administration would do? Like, for example, would you put in no-fly zones over Syria? Governor Romney: But I do not want to see a military involvement on the part of our troops. And this isnt going to be necessary. We have -- with our partners in the region, we have sufficient resources to support those groups. But, look, this has been going on for a year. This is a time -- this should have been a time for American leadership. We should have taken a leading role -- not militarily, but a leading role organizationally, governmentally -- to bring together the parties there, to find responsible parties. As you hear from intelligence sources even today, the insurgents are highly disparate; they havent come together; they havent formed a unity group, a council of some kind. That needs to happen. America can help that happen. And we need to make sure they have the arms they need to carry out the very important role, which is getting rid of Assad. Mr. Schieffer: Can we get a quick response, Mr. President? Because I want to ask about Egypt. President Obama: Ill be very quick. What you just heard Governor Romney said is he doesnt have different ideas, and thats because were doing exactly what we should be doing to try to promote a moderate Syrian leadership and an effective transition so that we get Assad out. Thats the kind of leadership weve shown. Thats the kind of leadership well continue to show. Mr. Schieffer: May I ask you, during the Egyptian turmoil, there came a point when you said it was time for President Mubarak to go. President Obama: Right. Mr. Schieffer: Some in your administration thought perhaps we should have waited a while on that. Do you have any regrets about that? President Obama: No, I dont, because I think that America has to stand with democracy. The notion that we would have tanks run over those young people who were in Tahrir Square -- that is not the kind of American leadership that John F. Kennedy talked about 50 years ago. But what Ive also said is that now that you have a democratically elected government in Egypt, they have to make sure that they take responsibility for protecting religious minorities -- and we have put significant pressure on them to make sure theyre doing that; to recognize the rights of women, which is critical throughout the region. These countries cant develop if young women are not given the kind of education that they need. They have to abide by their treaty with Israel. That is a red line for us, because not only is Israels security at stake, but our security is at stake if that unravels. They have to make sure that theyre cooperating with us when it comes to counterterrorism. And we will help them with respect to developing their own economy -- because ultimately, whats going to make the Egyptian revolution successful for the people of Egypt but also for the world is if those young people who gathered there are seeing opportunities. Their aspirations are similar to young peoples here. They want jobs. They want to be able to make sure their kids are going to a good school. They want to make sure that they have a roof over their heads and that they have the prospects of a better life in the future. And so one of the things that weve been doing is, for example, organizing entrepreneurship conferences with these Egyptians to give them a sense of how they can start rebuilding their economy in a way thats non-corrupt, thats transparent. But what is also important for us to understand is, is that for America to be successful in this region, there are some things that were going to have to do here at home as well. One of the challenges over the last decade is weve done experiments in nation-building in places like Iraq and Afghanistan, and weve neglected, for example, developing our own economy, our own energy sectors, our own education system. And its very hard for us to project leadership around the world when were not doing what we need to do here. Mr. Schieffer: Governor Romney, Im going to hear your response to that. But I would just ask you, would you have stuck with Mubarak? Governor Romney: But once it exploded, I felt the same as the President did, which is these freedom voices in the streets of Egypt were the people who were speaking of our principles. And President Mubarak had done things which were unimaginable, and the idea of him crushing his people was not something that we could possibly support. Let me step back and talk about what I think our mission has to be in the Middle East and even more broadly -- because our purpose is to make sure the world is more -- is peaceful. We want a peaceful planet. We want people to be able to enjoy their lives and know theyre going to have a bright and prosperous future and not be at war. Thats our purpose. And the mantle of leadership for promoting the principles of peace has fallen to America. We didnt ask for it, but its an honor that we have it. But for us to be able to promote those principles of peace requires us to be strong, and that begins with a strong economy here at home. And unfortunately, the economy is not stronger. When the President of Iraq -- excuse me, of Iran, Ahmadinejad, says that our debt makes us not a great country, thats a frightening thing. The former chief of -- the Joint Chiefs of Staff said that -- Admiral Mullen -- said that our debt is the biggest national security threat we face. We have weakened our economy. We need a strong economy. We need to have, as well, a strong military. Our military is second to none in the world. Were blessed with terrific soldiers and extraordinary technology and intelligence. But the idea of a trillion dollars in cuts through sequestration and budget cuts to the military would change that. We need to have strong allies. Our association and connection with our allies is essential to Americas strength. Were the great nation that has allies -- 42 allies and friends around the world. And finally we have to stand by our principles. And if were strong in each of those things, American influence will grow. But, unfortunately, in nowhere in the world is Americas influence greater today than it was four years ago. Mr. Schieffer: All right. Governor Romney: President Obama: Bob, I think -- Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: Youre going to get a chance to respond to that because that's a perfect segue into our next segment, and that is what is Americas role in the world. And that is the question: What do each of you see as our role in the world? And I believe, Governor Romney, its your turn to go first. Governor Romney: We recognize that there are places of conflict in the world. We want to end those conflicts to the extent humanly possible. But in order to be able to fulfill our role in the world, America must be strong. America must lead. And for that to happen, we have to strengthen our economy here at home. You can't have 23 million people struggling to get a job. You can't have an economy that over the last three years keeps slowing down in its growth rate. You can't have kids coming out of college, half of whom can't find a job today, or a job that's commensurate with their college degree. We have to get our economy going. And our military -- weve got to strengthen our military long term. We don't know what the world is going to throw at us down the road. We make decisions today in a military that will confront challenges we can't imagine. In the 2000 debates, there was no mention of terrorism, for instance. And a year later, 9/11 happened. So we have to make decisions based upon uncertainty, and that means a strong military. I will not cut our military budget. We have to also stand by our allies. I think the tension that existed between Israel and the United States was very unfortunate. I think also that pulling our missile defense program out of Poland in the way we did was also unfortunate in terms of, if you will, disrupting the relationship in some ways that existed between us. And then of course, with regards to standing for our principles, when the students took the streets in Tehran, and the people there protested, the Green Revolution occurred. For the President to be silent, I thought was an enormous mistake. We have to stand for our principles, stand for our allies, stand for a strong military and stand for a stronger economy. Mr. Schieffer: Mr. President. President Obama: America remains the one indispensible nation, and the world needs a strong America, and it is stronger now than when I came into office. Because we ended the war in Iraq, we were able to refocus our attention on not only the terrorist threat, but also beginning a transition process in Afghanistan. It also allowed us to refocus on alliances and relationships that had been neglected for a decade. And, Governor Romney, our alliances have never been stronger -- in Asia, in Europe, in Africa, with Israel, where we have unprecedented military and intelligence cooperation, including dealing with the Iranian threat. But what we also have been able to do is position ourselves so we can start rebuilding America. And thats what my plan does -- making sure that were bringing manufacturing back to our shores so that were creating jobs here, as weve done with the auto industry -- not rewarding companies that are shipping jobs overseas; making sure that weve got the best education system in the world, including retraining our workers for the jobs of tomorrow. Doing everything we can to control our own energy. Weve cut our oil imports to the lowest level in two decades because weve developed oil and natural gas, but we also have to develop clean energy technologies that will allow us to cut our exports in half by 2020. Thats the kind of leadership that we need to show. And weve got to make sure that we reduce our deficit. Unfortunately, Governor Romneys plan doesnt do it. Weve got to do it in a responsible way by cutting out spending we dont need, but also by asking the wealthiest to pay a little bit more. That way we can invest in the research and technology thats always kept us at the cutting edge. Now, Governor Romney has taken a different approach throughout this campaign. Both at home and abroad, he has proposed wrong and reckless policies. Hes praised George Bush as a good economic steward and Dick Cheney as somebody who shows great wisdom and judgment. And taking us back to those kinds of strategies that got us into this mess are not the way that we are going to maintain leadership in the 21st century. Mr. Schieffer: Governor Romney, wrong and reckless policies? Governor Romney: The President said by now wed be at 5.4 percent unemployment. Were 9 million jobs short of that. I will get America working again and see rising take-home pay again, and Ill do it with five simple steps. Number one, we are going to have North American energy independence. Were going to do it by taking full advantage of oil, coal, gas, nuclear, and our renewables. Number two, were going to increase our trade. Trade grows about 12 percent per year. It doubles about every five or so years. We can do better than that, particularly in Latin America. The opportunities for us in Latin America we have just not taken advantage of fully. As a matter of fact, Latin Americas economy is almost as big as the economy of China. Were all focused on China. Latin America is a huge opportunity for us -- time zone, language opportunities. Number three, were going to have to have training programs that work for our workers and schools that finally put the parents and the teachers and the kids first, and the teachers unions are going to have to go behind. And then were going to have to get to a balanced budget. We cant expect entrepreneurs and businesses, large and small, to take their life savings or their companys money and invest in America if they think were headed to the road to Greece. And thats where were going right now unless we finally get off this spending and borrowing binge. And Ill get us on track to a balanced budget. And finally, number five, weve got to champion small business. Small businesses are where jobs come from. Two-thirds of our jobs come from small businesses. New business formation is down at the lowest level in 30 years under this administration. I want to bring it back and get back good jobs and rising take-home pay. President Obama: Well, lets talk about what we need to compete. First of all, Governor Romney talks about small businesses, but, Governor, when you were in Massachusetts, small businesses development ranked about 48th, I think, out of 50 states in Massachusetts because the policies that youre promoting actually dont help small businesses. And the way you define small businesses include folks at the very top -- they include you and me. Thats not the kind of small business promotion we need. But lets take an example that we know is going to make a difference in the 21st century, and thats our education policy. We didnt have a lot of chance to talk about this in the last debate. Under my leadership, what weve done is reformed education, working with governors -- 46 states. Weve seen progress and gains in schools that were having a terrible time, and theyre starting to finally make progress. And what I now want to do is to hire more teachers, especially in math and science, because we know that weve fallen behind when it comes to math and science. And those teachers can make a difference. Now, Governor Romney, when you were asked by teachers whether or not this would help the economy grow, you said this isnt going to help the economy grow. When you were asked about reduced class sizes, you said class sizes dont make a difference. But I tell you, if you talk to teachers, they will tell you it does make a difference. And if weve got math teachers who are able to provide the kind of support that they need for our kids, thats whats going to determine whether or not the new businesses are created here. Companies are going to locate here depending on whether weve got the most highly skilled workforce. And the kinds of budget proposals that youve put forward, when we dont ask either you or me to pay a dime more in terms of reducing the deficit, but instead we slash support for education, thats undermining our long-term competitiveness. That is not good for Americas position in the world -- and the world notices. Mr. Schieffer: Let me get back to foreign policy. Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: Can I just get back to -- Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer:: Okay. Governor Romney: How did we do that? Well, Republicans and Democrats came together on a bipartisan basis to put in place education principles that focused on having great teachers in the classroom, and that was -- President Obama: Ten years earlier, Governor. Governor Romney: President Obama: But that was 10 years before you took office. Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: Gentlemen. Governor Romney: President Obama: And then you cut education spending when you came into office. Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: All right. Governor Romney: President Obama: That happened before you came into office, though. Mr. Schieffer: Governor -- Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: Let me just -- I want to try to shift it, because we have heard some of this in the other debates. Governor, you say you want a bigger military, you want a bigger Navy. You dont want to cut defense spending. What I want to ask you -- were talking about financial problems in this country -- where are you going to get the money? Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: But can you do this without driving us deeper into debt? Governor Romney: Number two, we take some programs that we are going to keep, like Medicaid, which is a program for the poor -- we take that health care program for the poor and we give it to the states to run because states run these programs more efficiently. As a governor, I thought, please, give me this program. I can run this more efficiently than the federal government. Mr. Schieffer: Can he do that? Governor Romney: President Obama: Bob -- Mr. Schieffer: Let -- Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: Well, thats what Im trying to find out about. President Obama: He should have answered the first question.Look, Governor Romney has called for $5 trillion of tax cuts that he says hes going to pay for by closing deductions. Now, the math doesnt work, but he continues to claim that hes going to do it. He then wants to spend another $2 trillion on military spending that our military is not asking for. Now, keep in mind that our military spending has gone up every single year that Ive been in office. We spend more on our military than the next 10 countries combined -- China, Russia, France, the United Kingdom, you name it -- next 10. And what I did was work with our Joint Chiefs of Staff to think about what are we going to need in the future to make sure that we are safe, and thats the budget that weve put forward. But what you cant do is spend $2 trillion in additional military spending that the military is not asking for; $5 trillion on tax cuts. You say that youre going to pay for it by closing loopholes and deductions without naming what those loopholes and deductions are, and then somehow youre also going to deal with the deficit that weve already got. The math simply doesnt work. But when it comes to our military, what we have to think about is not just budgets. Weve got think about capabilities. We need to be thinking about cybersecurity. We need to be thinking about space. That's exactly what our budget does, but its driven by strategy. Its not driven by politics. Its not driven by members of Congress and what they would like to see. Its driven by what are we going to need to keep the American people safe. That's exactly what our budget does. And it also then allows us to reduce our deficit, which is a significant national security concern, because weve got to make sure that our economy is strong at home so that we can project military power overseas. Governor Romney: The President hasnt balanced a budget yet. I expect to have the opportunity to do so myself. Im going to be able to balance the budget. Lets talk about military spending, and that's this -- our Navy -- Mr. Schieffer: Thirty seconds. Governor Romney: Our Air Force is older and smaller than any time since it was founded in 1947. Weve changed for the first time since FDR -- since FDR, we had the -- weve always had the strategy of saying we could fight in two conflicts at once. Now were changing to one conflict. Look, this, in my view, is the highest responsibility of the President of the United States, which is to maintain the safety of the American people. And I will not cut our military budget by a trillion dollars, which is the combination of the budget cuts the President has, as well as the sequestration cuts. That, in my view, is making our future less certain and less secure -- President Obama: Bob, I just need to comment on this. First of all, the sequester is not something that I proposed. Its something that Congress has proposed. It will not happen. The budget that were talking about is not reducing our military spending, its maintaining it. But I think Governor Romney maybe hasnt spent enough time looking at how our military works. You mentioned the Navy, for example, and that we have fewer ships than we did in 1916. Well, Governor, we also have fewer horses and bayonets, because the nature of our military has changed. We have these things called aircraft carriers where planes land on them. We have these ships that go underwater, nuclear submarines. And so the question is not a game of Battleship where were counting ships; its what are our capabilities. And so when I sit down with the Secretary of the Navy and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, we determine how are we going to be best able to meet all of our defense needs in a way that also keeps faith with our troops, that also makes sure that our veterans have the kind of support that they need when they come home. And that is not reflected in the kind of budget that youre putting forward, because it just doesnt work. And we visited the website quite a bit and it still doesnt work. Mr. Schieffer: A lot to cover. Id like to move to the next segment: Red lines -- Israel and Iran. Would either of you -- and youll have two minutes -- and, President Obama, you have the first go at this one. Would either of you be willing to declare that an attack on Israel is an attack on the United States -- which, of course, is the same promise that we give to our close allies like Japan. And if you made such a declaration, would not that deter Iran? Its certainly deterred the Soviet Union for a long, long time when we made that promise to our allies. Mr. President. President Obama: First of all, Israel is a true friend; it is our greatest ally in the region. And if Israel is attacked, America will stand with Israel. Ive made that clear throughout my presidency. Mr. Schieffer: So youre saying weve already made that declaration? President Obama: I will stand with Israel if they are attacked. And this is the reason why, working with Israel, we have created the strongest military and intelligence cooperation between our two countries in history. In fact, this week, well be carrying out the largest military exercise with Israel in history -- this very week. But to the issue of Iran, as long as Im President of the United States, Iran will not get a nuclear weapon. I made that clear when I came into office. We then organized the strongest coalition and the strongest sanctions against Iran in history, and it is crippling their economy. Their currency has dropped 80 percent. Their oil production has plunged to the lowest level since they were fighting a war with Iraq 20 years ago. So their economy is in shambles. And the reason we did this is because a nuclear Iran is a threat to our national security and its a threat to Israels national security. We cannot afford to have a nuclear arms race in the most volatile region in the world. Iran is a state sponsor of terrorism, and for them to be able to provide nuclear technology to non-state actors, thats unacceptable. And they have said that they want to see Israel wiped off the map. So the work that weve done with respect to sanctions now offers Iran a choice: They can take the diplomatic route and end their nuclear program, or they will have to face a united world and a United States President -- me -- who said were not going to take any options off the table. The disagreement I have with Governor Romney is that during the course of this campaign, hes often talked as if we should take premature military action. I think that would be a mistake, because when Ive sent young men and women into harms way, I always understand that that is the last resort, not the first resort. Mr. Schieffer: Two minutes. Governor Romney: Number two, with regards to Iran and the threat of Iran -- theres no question but that a nuclear Iran, a nuclear-capable Iran is unacceptable to America. It presents a threat not only to our friends, but ultimately a threat to us to have Iran have nuclear material, nuclear weapons that could be used against us or used to be threatening to us. Its also essential for us to understand what our mission is in Iran, and that is to dissuade Iran from having a nuclear weapon through peaceful and diplomatic means. And crippling sanctions are something I called for five years ago -- when I was in Israel speaking at the Herzliya conference, I laid out seven steps. Crippling sanctions were number one and they do work. Youre seeing it right now in the economy. Its absolutely the right thing to do to have crippling sanctions. Id have put them in place earlier, but its good that we have them. Number two, something I would add today is I would tighten those sanctions. I would say that ships that carry Iranian oil cant come into our ports. I imagine the EU would agree with us as well. Not only ships couldnt, Id say companies that are moving their oil cant; people who are trading in their oil cant. I would tighten those sanctions further. Secondly, Id take on diplomatic isolation efforts. Id make sure that Ahmadinejad is indicted under the genocide convention. His words amount to genocide in citation. I would indict him for it. I would also make sure that their diplomats are treated like the pariah they are around the world -- the same way we treated the apartheid diplomats of South Africa. We need to increase pressure time and time again on Iran because anything other than a solution to this which says -- which stops this nuclear folly of theirs is unacceptable to America. And of course, a military action is the last resort. It is something one would only -- only consider if all of the other avenues had been tried to their full extent. Mr. Schieffer: Let me ask both of you, there are -- as you know, there are reports that Iran and the United States as part of an international group have agreed in principle to talks about Irans nuclear program. What is the deal -- if there are such talks, what is the deal that you would accept? Mr. President. President Obama: Well, first of all, those are reports in the newspaper. They are not true. But our goal is to get Iran to recognize it needs to give up its nuclear program and abide by the U.N. resolutions that have been in place -- because they have the opportunity to reenter the community of nations. And we would welcome that. There are people in Iran who have the same aspirations as people all around the world for a better life. And we hope that their leadership takes the right decision. But the deal well accept is they end their nuclear program. Its very straightforward. And Im glad that Governor Romney agrees with the steps that were taking. There have been times, Governor, frankly, during the course of this campaign where it sounded like you thought that youd do the same things we did, but youd say them louder and somehow that would make a difference. And it turns out that the work involved in setting up these crippling sanctions is painstaking. Its meticulous. We started from the day we got into office. And the reason it was so important -- and this is a testament to how weve restored American credibility and strength around the world -- is we had to make sure that all the countries participated, even countries like Russia and China, because if its just us that are imposing sanctions, weve had sanctions in place for a long time. Its because we got everybody to agree that Iran is seeing so much pressure. And weve got to maintain that pressure. There is a deal to be had, and that is that they abide by the rules that have already been established; they convince the international community they are not pursuing a nuclear program; there are inspections that are very intrusive, but over time what they can do is regain credibility. In the meantime, though, were not going to let up the pressure until we have clear evidence that that takes place. And one last thing, just to make this point -- the clock is ticking. Were not going to allow Iran to perpetually engage in negotiations that lead nowhere. And Ive been very clear to them. Because of the intelligence coordination that we do with a range of countries, including Israel, we have a sense of when they would get breakout capacity, which means that we would not be able to intervene in time to stop their nuclear program. And that clock is ticking. Mr. Schieffer: All right. President Obama: And were going to make sure that if they do not meet the demands of the international community, then we are going to take all options necessary to make sure they don't have a nuclear weapon. Mr. Schieffer: Governor. Governor Romney: And I say that because from the very beginning, the President, in his campaign some four years ago, said hed meet with all the worlds worst actors in his first year. Hed sit down with Chavez and Kim Jong-il, with Castro and with President Ahmadinejad of Iran. And I think they looked and thought, well, that's an unusual honor to receive from the President of the United States. And then the President began what Ive called an apology tour of going to various nations in the Middle East and criticizing America. I think they looked at that and saw weakness. Then when there were dissidents in the streets of Tehran, a Green Revolution, holding signs saying, is America with us, the President was silent. I think they noticed that as well. And I think that when the President said he was going to create daylight between ourselves and Israel, that they noticed that as well. All of these things suggested, I think, to the Iranian mullahs that, hey, we can keep on pushing along here, we can keep talks going on, were just going to keep on spinning centrifuges. Now there are some 10,000 centrifuges spinning uranium, preparing to create a nuclear threat to the United States and to the world. Thats unacceptable for us. And its essential for a President to show strength from the very beginning, to make it very clear what is acceptable and not acceptable. And an Iranian nuclear program is not acceptable to us. They must not develop nuclear capability. And the way to make sure they understand that is by having from the very beginning the tightest sanctions possible. They need to be tightened. Our diplomatic isolation needs to be tougher. We need to indict Ahmadinejad. We need to put the pressure on them as hard as we possibly can, because if we do that, we wont have to take the military action. President Obama: Bob, let me just respond. Nothing Governor Romney just said is true, starting with this notion of me apologizing. This has been probably the biggest whopper thats been told during the course of this campaign. And every fact-checker and every reporter whos looked at it, Governor, has said this is not true. And when it comes to tightening sanctions, look, as I said before, weve put in the toughest, most crippling sanctions ever. And the fact is, while we were coordinating an international coalition to make sure these sanctions were effective, you were still invested in a Chinese state oil company that was doing business with the Iranian oil sector. So Ill let the American people decide, judge who is going to be more effective and more credible when it comes to imposing crippling sanctions. And with respect to our attitude about the Iranian Revolution, I was very clear about the murderous activities that had taken place and that was contrary to international law and everything that civilized people stand for. And so the strength that we have shown in Iran is shown by the fact that weve been able to mobilize the world. When I came into office, the world was divided; Iran was resurgent. Iran is at its weakest point economically, strategically, militarily, than in many years. And we are going to continue to keep the pressure on to make sure that they do not get a nuclear weapon. Thats in Americas national interest, and that will be the case so long as Im President. Governor Romney: Number two, Mr. President, the reason I call it an apology tour is because you went to the Middle East and you flew to Egypt and to Saudi Arabia and to Turkey and Iraq, and -- and, by the way, you skipped Israel, our closest friend in the region, but you went to the other nations. And, by the way, they noticed that you skipped Israel. And then in those nations, and on Arabic TV, you said that America had been dismissive and derisive. You said that on occasion America has dictated to other nations. Mr. President, America has not dictated to other nations. We have freed other nations from dictator. President Obama: Bob, let me respond. If were going to talk about trips that weve taken -- when I was a candidate for office, the first trip I took was to visit our troops. And when I went to Israel as a candidate, I didnt take donors, I didnt attend fundraisers. I went to Yad Vashem, the Holocaust museum there, to remind myself the nature of evil and why our bond with Israel will be unbreakable. And then I went down to the border town of Sderot, which had experienced missiles raining down from Hamas. And I saw families there who showed me where missiles had come down near their childrens bedrooms, and I was reminded of what that would mean if those were my kids -- which is why, as President, we funded an Iron Dome program to stop those missiles. So thats how Ive used my travels, when I traveled to Israel and when I traveled to the region. And the central question at this point is going to be whos going to be credible to all parties involved. And they can look at my track record -- whether its Irans sanctions, whether its dealing with counterterrorism, whether its supporting democracy, whether its supporting womens rights, whether its supporting religious minorities -- and they can say that the President of the United States and the United States of America has stood on the right side of history. And that kind of credibility is precisely why weve been able to show leadership on a wide range of issues facing the world right now. Mr. Schieffer: What if the Prime Minister of Israel called you on the phone and said, Our bombers are on the way. Were going to bomb Iran -- what do you say? Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: So youre saying -- Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: Okay, well, lets see what -- Governor Romney: I look around the world -- I dont see our influence growing around the world. I see our influence receding -- in part because of the failure of the President to deal with our economic challenges at home; in part because of our withdrawal from our commitment to our military in the way I think it ought to be; in part because of the turmoil with Israel. I mean, the President received a letter from 38 Democrat senators saying that tensions with Israel were a real problem. They asked him, please repair the tension -- Democrat senators -- please repair the damage in his own party. President Obama: All right, Governor, the problem is, is that on a whole range of issues -- whether its the Middle East, whether its Afghanistan, whether its Iraq, whether its now Iran -- youve been all over the map. I mean, Im pleased that you now are endorsing our policy of applying diplomatic pressure and potentially having bilateral discussions with the Iranians to end their nuclear program. But just a few years ago, you said thats something youd never do. In the same way that you initially opposed a timetable in Afghanistan; now youre for it, although it depends. In the same way that you say you would have ended the war in Iraq, but recently gave a speech saying that we should have 20,000 more folks in there. The same way that you said that it was mission creep to go after Qaddafi. When it comes to going after Osama bin Laden, you said, well, any President would make that call. But when you were a candidate in 2008 -- as I was -- and I said if I got bin Laden in our sights, I would take that shot, you said we shouldnt move heaven and earth to get one man. You said we should ask Pakistan for permission. And if we had asked Pakistan for permission, we would not have gotten it [him]. And it was worth moving heaven and earth to get him After we killed bin Laden, I was at Ground Zero for a memorial and talked to a young woman who was four years old when 9/11 happened. And the last conversation she had with her father was him calling from the Twin Towers, saying, Peyton, I love you, and I will always watch over you. And for the next decade she was haunted by that conversation. And she said to me, By finally getting bin Laden, that brought some closure to me. And when we do things like that, when we bring those who have harmed us to justice, that sends a message to the world, and it tells Peyton that we did not forget her father. Mr. Schieffer: All right. President Obama: And I make that point because thats the kind of clarity of leadership -- and those decisions are not always popular. Those decisions generally are not poll-tested. And even some in my own party, including my current Vice President, had the same critique as you did. But what the American people understand is, is that I look at what we need to get done to keep the American people safe and to move our interests forward, and I make those decisions. Mr. Schieffer: All right, lets go and that leads us -- this takes us right to the next segment, Governor, Americas longest war, Afghanistan and Pakistan -- Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: Governor, you get to go first here. Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: Well, with respect, sir, you had laid out quite a program there. Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: And well give you -- well give you -- President Obama: Well agree -- Mr. Schieffer: Well catch up. The United States is scheduled to turn over responsibility for security in Afghanistan to the Afghan government in 2014. At that point we will withdraw our combat troops, leave a smaller force of Americans -- if I understand our policy -- in Afghanistan for training purposes. It seems to me the key question here is what do you do if the deadline arrives and it is obvious the Afghans are unable to handle their security? Do we still leave? And I believe, Governor Romney, you go first. Governor Romney: I can tell you at the same time that we will make sure that we look at whats happening in Pakistan and recognize that whats happening in Pakistan is going to have a major impact on the success in Afghanistan. And I say that because I know a lot of people just feel like we should brush our hands and walk away -- and I don't mean you, Mr. President -- but some people in our nation feel that Pakistan isnt being nice to us and that we should just walk away from them. Pakistan is important to the region, to the world, and to us, because Pakistan has a hundred nuclear warheads, and they're rushing to build a lot more. Theyll have more than Great Britain sometime in the relatively near future. They also have the Haqqani Network and the Taliban existent within their country. And so a Pakistan that falls apart, becomes a failed state, would be of extraordinary danger to Afghanistan and to us. And so were going to have to remain helpful in encouraging Pakistan to move towards a more stable government and rebuild a relationship with us. And that means that our aid that we provide to Pakistan is going to have to be conditioned upon certain benchmarks being met. So for me, I look at this as both a need to help move Pakistan in the right direction and also to get Afghanistan to be ready, and they will be ready by the end of 2014. Mr. Schieffer: Mr. President. President Obama: When I came into office, we were still bogged down in Iraq, and Afghanistan had been drifting for a decade. We ended the war in Iraq, refocused our attention on Afghanistan. And we did deliver a surge of troops. That was facilitated in part because we had ended the war in Iraq. And we are now in a position where we have met many of the objectives that got us there in the first place. Part of what had happened is we had forgotten why we had gone. We went because there were people who were responsible for 3,000 American deaths. And so we decimated al Qaedas core leadership in the border regions between Afghanistan and Pakistan. We then started to build up Afghan forces, and we're now in a position where we can transition out, because theres no reason why Americans should die when Afghans are perfectly capable of defending their own country. That transition has to take place in a responsible fashion. Weve been there a long time, but weve got to make sure that we and our coalition partners are pulling out responsibly and giving Afghans the capabilities that they need. But what I think the American people recognize is after a decade of war, its time to do some nation-building here at home. And what we can now do is free up some resources to, for example, put Americans back to work -- especially our veterans -- rebuilding our roads, our bridges, our schools; making sure that our veterans are getting the care that they need when it comes to Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and Traumatic Brain Injury; making sure that the certifications that they need for good jobs of the future are in place. I was having lunch with some -- a veteran in Minnesota who had been a medic dealing with the most extreme circumstances. When he came home and he wanted to become a nurse, he had to start from scratch. And what weve said is lets change those certifications. The First Lady has done great work with an organization called Joining Forces, putting our veterans back to work. And as a consequence, veterans unemployment is actually now lower than the general population; it was higher when I came into office. So those are the kinds of things that we can now do because were making that transition in Afghanistan. Mr. Schieffer: All right, let me go to Governor Romney, because you talked about Pakistan and what needs to be done there. General Allen, our commander in Afghanistan, says that Americans continue to die at the hands of groups who are supported by Pakistan. We know that Pakistan has arrested the doctor who helped us catch Obama [sic] -- bin Laden. It still provides safe haven for terrorists. Yet we continue to give Pakistan billions of dollars. Is it time for us to divorce Pakistan? Governor Romney: This is a nation which, if it falls apart, if it becomes a failed state, there are nuclear weapons there, and youve got terrorists there who could grab their hands onto those nuclear weapons. This is an important part of the world for us. Pakistan is technically an ally, and theyre not acting very much like an ally right now, but we have some work to do. And I dont blame the administration for the fact that the relationship with Pakistan is strained. We had to go into Pakistan. We had to go in there to get Osama bin Laden. That was the right thing to do. And that upset them, but there was obviously a great deal of anger even before that. But were going to have to work with the people in Pakistan to try and help them move to a more responsible course than the one that theyre on. Its important for them. Its important for the nuclear weapons. Its important for the success of Afghanistan, because inside Pakistan you have a large -- Pashtuns that are Taliban. Theyre going to come rushing back in to Afghanistan when we go, and thats one of the reasons the Afghan security forces have so much work to do to be able to fight against that. But its important for us to recognize that we cant just walk away from Pakistan. But we do need to make sure that as we send support for them, that this is tied to them making progress on matters that would lead them to becoming a civil society. Mr. Schieffer: Let me ask you, Governor -- because we know President Obamas position on this -- what is your position on the use of drones? Governor Romney: Let me also note that, as I said earlier, were going to have to do more than just going after leaders and killing bad guys, important as that is. Were also going to have to have a far more effective and comprehensive strategy to help move the world away from terror and Islamic extremism. We havent done that yet. We talk a lot about these things, but you look at the record -- you look at the record of the last four years and say, is Iran closer to a bomb? Yes. Is the Middle East in tumult? Yes. Is al Qaeda on the run, on its heels? No. Are Israel and the Palestinians closer to reaching a peace agreement? No, they havent had talks in two years. We have not seen the progress we need to have. And Im convinced that with strong leadership and an effort to build a strategy based upon helping these nations reject extremism, we can see the kind of peace and prosperity the world demands. President Obama: Well, keep in mind, our strategy wasnt just going after bin Laden. Weve created partnerships throughout the region to deal with extremism -- in Somalia, in Yemen, in Pakistan. And what weve also done is engage these governments in the kind of reforms that are actually going to make a difference in peoples lives day to day -- to make sure that their governments arent corrupt; to make sure that they are treating women with the kind of respect and dignity that every nation that succeeds has shown; and to make sure that theyve got a free market system that works. So across the board, we are engaging them in building capacity in these countries, and weve stood on the side of democracy. One thing I think Americans should be proud of -- when Tunisians began to protest, this nation -- me, my administration -- stood with them earlier than just about any other country. In Egypt, we stood on the side of democracy. In Libya, we stood on the side of the people. And as a consequence, theres no doubt that attitudes about Americans have changed. But there are always going to be elements in these countries that potentially threaten the United States, and we want to shrink those groups and those networks, and we can do that. But were always also going to have to maintain vigilance when it comes to terrorist activities. The truth, though, is that al Qaeda is much weaker than it was when I came into office, and they dont have the same capacities to attack the U.S. homeland and our allies as they did four years ago. Mr. Schieffer: Lets go to the next segment, because its a very important one. It is the rise of China and future challenges for America. I want to just begin this by asking both of you -- and, Mr. President, you go first this time -- what do you believe is the greatest future threat to the national security of this country? President Obama: Well, I think it will continue to be terrorist networks. We have to remain vigilant, as I just said. But with respect to China, China is both an adversary but also a potential partner in the international community if its following the rules. So my attitude coming into office was that we are going to insist that China plays by the same rules as everybody else. Now, I know Americans had seen jobs being shipped overseas, businesses and workers not getting a level playing field when it came to trade. And thats the reason why I set up a trade task force to go after cheaters when it came to international trade. Thats the reason why we have brought more cases against China for violating trade rules than the other -- the previous administration had done in two terms. And weve won just about every case that we filed, that has been decided. In fact, just recently, steel workers in Ohio and throughout the Midwest, Pennsylvania, are in a position now to sell steel to China because we won that case. We had a tire case in which they were flooding us with cheap domestic tires -- or cheap Chinese tires -- and we put a stop to it and, as a consequence, saved jobs throughout America. I have to say that Governor Romney criticized me for being too tough in that tire case; said this wouldnt be good for American workers and that it would protectionist. But I tell you, those workers dont feel that way. They feel as if they had finally an administration who was going to take this issue seriously. Over the long term, in order for us to compete with China, weve also got to make sure, though, that were taking care of business here at home. If we dont have the best education system in the world, if we don't continue to put money into research and technology that will allow us to create great businesses here in the United States, thats how we lose the competition. And unfortunately, Governor Romneys budget and his proposals would not allow us to make those investments. Mr. Schieffer: All right. Governor. Governor Romney: Lets talk about China. China has an interest thats very much like ours in one respect, and that is they want a stable world. They dont want war. They dont want to see protectionism. They dont want to see the world break out into various form of chaos, because they have to manufacture goods and put people to work. They have about 20,000 -- 20 million, rather, people coming out of the farms every year, coming into the cities, needing jobs. So they want the economy to work and the world to be free and open. And so we can be a partner with China. We dont have to be an adversary in any way, shape, or form. We can work with them. We can collaborate with them if they're willing to be responsible. Now, they look at us and say, is it a good idea to be with America? How strong are we going to be? How strong is our economy? They look at the fact that we owe them a trillion dollars and owe other people $16 trillion in total, including them. They look at our decision to cut back on our military capabilities -- a trillion dollars. The Secretary of Defense called these trillion dollars of cuts to our military devastating. Its not my term. Its the Presidents own Secretary of Defense called them devastating. They look at Americas commitments around the world and they see whats happening, and they say, well, okay, is America going to be strong? And the answer is, yes, if Im President, America will be very strong. Well also make sure that we have trade relations with China that work for us. Ive watched year in and year out as companies have shut down and people have lost their jobs because China has not played by the same rules, in part by holding down artificially the value of their currency; it holds down the prices of their goods. It means our goods arent as competitive, and we lose jobs. That's got to end. They're making some progress. They need to make more. That's why on day one I will label them a currency manipulator, which allows us to apply tariffs where they're taking jobs. They're stealing our intellectual property, our patents, our designs, our technology, hacking into our computers, counterfeiting our goods. They have to understand we want to trade with them, we want a world that's stable, we like free enterprise, but youve got to play by the rules. Mr. Schieffer: Well, Governor, let me just ask you, if you declare them a currency manipulator on day one, some people say youre just going to start a trade war with China on day one. Is that -- isnt there a risk that that could happen? Governor Romney: And so we have to understand that we can't just surrender and lose jobs year in and year out. We have to say to our friends in China, look, you guys are playing aggressively, we understand it, but this can't keep on going. You can't keep on holding down the value of your currency, stealing our intellectual property, counterfeiting our products, selling them around the world -- even into the United States. I was with one company that makes valves in process industries. And they said, look, we were having some valves coming in that were broken and we had to repair them under warranty. And we looked them up, and they had our serial number on them, and then we noticed that there was more than one with that same serial number. There were counterfeit products being made overseas with the same serial number as a U.S. company, the same packaging. These were being sold into our market and around the world as if they were made by the U.S. competitor. This can't go on. I want a great relationship with China. China can be our partner, but that doesn't mean they can just roll all over us and steal our jobs on an unfair basis. President Obama: Well, Governor Romney is right, you are familiar with jobs being shipped overseas because you invested in companies that were shipping jobs overseas. And that's your right. I mean, that's how our free market works. But Ive made a different bet on American workers. If we had taken your advice, Governor Romney, about our auto industry, wed be buying cars from China instead of selling cars to China. If we take your advice with respect to how we change our tax code so that companies that are in profits overseas dont pay U.S. taxes compared to companies here that are paying taxes, thats estimated to create 800,000 jobs. The problem is they wont be here; theyll be in places like China. And if were not making investments in education and basic research, which is not something that the private sector is doing at a sufficient pace right now and has never done, then we will lose the lead in things like clean energy technology. Now, with respect to what weve done with China already, U.S. exports have doubled since I came into office to China. And, actually, currencies are at their most advantageous point for U.S. exporters since 1993. We absolutely have to make more progress, and thats why were going to keep on pressing. And when it comes to our military and Chinese security, part of the reason that we were able to pivot to the Asia Pacific region after having ended the war in Iraq and transitioning out of Afghanistan is precisely because this is going to be a massive growth area in the future. And we believe China can be a partner, but were also sending a very clear signal that America is a Pacific power, that we are going to have a presence there. We are working with countries in the region to make sure, for example, that ships can pass through, that commerce continues. And were organizing trade relations with countries other than China so that China starts feeling more pressure about meeting basic international standards. Thats the kind of leadership weve shown in the region. Thats the kind of leadership that well continue to show. Governor Romney: My plan to get the industry on its feet when it was in real trouble was not to start writing checks. It was President Bush that wrote the first checks. I disagreed with that. I said they need -- these companies need to go through a managed bankruptcy. And in that process, they can get government help and government guarantees, but they need to go through bankruptcy to get rid of excess cost and the debt burden that theyd built up. And fortunately, the President -- President Obama: Governor Romney, thats not what you said. Governor Romney: President Obama: Governor Romney, you did not say that you would provide governor help. Governor Romney: President Obama: Lets check the record. Governor Romney: President Obama: Lets check the record. Governor Romney: President Obama: Governor, the people of Detroit dont forget. Governor Romney: President Obama: Governor, the fact of the matter is -- Governor Romney:  President Obama: Governor, Im happy to respond. Youve held the floor for a while. Governor Romney: President Obama: Look, I think anybody out there can check the record. Governor Romney, you keep on trying to airbrush history here. You were very clear that you would not provide government assistance to the U.S. auto companies even if they went through bankruptcy. You said that they could get it in the private marketplace. That wasnt true. They would have gone through -- Governor Romney: President Obama: No, I am not wrong. Governor Romney: President Obama: I am not wrong. Governor Romney: President Obama: People will look it up. Governor Romney: President Obama: But more importantly, it is true that in order for us to be competitive, were going to have to make some smart choices right now. Cutting our education budget -- thats not a smart choice. That will not help us compete with China. Cutting our investments in research and technology -- thats not a smart choice. That will not help us compete with China. Bringing down our deficit by adding $7 trillion of tax cuts and military spending that our military is not asking for, before we even get to the debt that we currently have -- that is not going to make us more competitive. Those are the kinds of choices that the American people face right now. Having a tax code that rewards companies that are shipping jobs overseas instead of companies that are investing here in the United States -- that will not make us more competitive. And the one thing that Im absolutely clear about is that after a decade in which we saw a drift, jobs being shipped overseas, nobody championing American workers and American businesses, weve now begun to make some real progress. What we cant do is go back to the same policies that got us into such difficulty in the first place. And thats why we have to move forward and not go back. Governor Romney: When you came to office, 32 million people on food stamps; today, 47 million people on food stamps. When you came to office, just over $10 trillion in debt; now $16 trillion in debt. It hasnt worked. You said by now wed be at 5.4 percent unemployment. Were 9 million jobs short of that. Ive met some of those people. I met them in Appleton, Wisconsin. I met a young woman in Philadelphia whos coming out of college, can't find work. Ann was with someone just the other day that was just weeping about not being able to get work. Its just a tragedy in a nation so prosperous as ours that these last four years have been so hard. And that's why its so critical that we make America once again the most attractive place in the world to start businesses, to build jobs, to grow the economy. And that's not going to happen by just hiring teachers. Look, Id love to -- I love teachers, and Im happy to have states and communities that want to hire teachers do that. By the way, I don't like to have the federal government start pushing its way deeper and deeper into our schools; let the states and localities do that. I was a governor -- the federal government didn't hire our teachers. Mr. Schieffer: Governor. Governor Romney: Mr. Schieffer: I think we all love teachers. Gentlemen, thank you so much for a very vigorous debate. We have come to the end. It is time for closing statements. I believe youre first, Mr. President. President Obama: Well, thank you very much, Bob, Governor Romney, and to Lynn University. Youve now heard three debates, months of campaigning and way too many TV commercials. And now youve got a choice. Over the last four years, weve made real progress digging our way out of policies that gave us two prolonged wars, record deficits, and the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. And Governor Romney wants to take us back to those policies -- a foreign policy that's wrong and reckless; economic policies that wont create jobs, won't reduce our deficit, but will make sure that folks at the very top don't have to play by the same rules that you do. And Ive got a different vision for America. I want to build on our strengths. And Ive put forward a plan to make sure that were bringing manufacturing jobs back to our shores by rewarding companies and small businesses that are investing here, not overseas. I want to make sure weve got the best education system in the world, and were retaining our workers for the jobs of tomorrow. I want to control our own energy by developing oil and natural gas, but also the energy sources of the future. Yes, I want to reduce our deficit by cutting spending that we don't need, but also by asking the wealthy to do a little bit more so that we can invest in things like research and technology that are the key to a 21st-century economy. As Commander-in-Chief, I will maintain the strongest military in the world, keep faith with our troops, and go after those who would do us harm. But after a decade of war, I think we all recognize weve got to do some nation-building here at home rebuilding our roads, our bridges, and especially caring for our veterans who sacrificed so much for our freedom. Weve been through tough times, but we always bounce back because of our character, because we pull together. And if I have the privilege of being your President for another four years, I promise you I will always listen to your voices, I will fight for your families, and I will work every single day to make sure that America continues to be the greatest nation on Earth. Thank you. Mr. Schieffer: Governor. Governor Romney: I also to want to make sure that we get this economy going. And there are two very different paths the country can take. One is a path represented by the President, which, at the end of four years, would mean wed have $20 trillion in debt, heading towards Greece. Ill get us on track to a balanced budget. The Presidents path will mean continuing declining in take-home pay. I want to make sure our take-home pay turns around and starts to grow. The Presidents path means 20 million people out of work, struggling for a good job. Ill get people back to work with 12 million new jobs. Im going to make sure that we get people off of food stamps, not by cutting the program, but by getting them good jobs. America is going to come back, and for that to happen, were going to have to have a President who can work across the aisle. I was in a state where my legislature was 87 percent Democrat. I learned how to get along on the other side of the aisle. Weve got to do that in Washington. Washington is broken. I know what it takes to get this country back, and well work with good Democrats and good Republicans to do that. This nation is the hope of the Earth. Weve been blessed by having a nation thats free and prosperous thanks to the contributions of the Greatest Generation. Theyve held a torch for the world to see, a torch of freedom and hope and opportunity. Now its our turn to take that torch. Im convinced well do it. We need strong leadership. Id like to be that leader with your support. Ill work with you. Ill lead you in an open and honest way. And I ask for your vote. Id like to be the next President of the United States to support and help this great nation, and to make sure that we all together maintain America as the hope of the Earth. Thank you so much. Mr. Schieffer: Gentlemen, thank you both so much. That brings an end to this years debates. And we want to thank Lynn University and its students for having us. As I always do at the end of these debates, I leave you with the words of my mom, who said, go vote.It makes you feel big and strong. Good night.  *  First 2012 Presidential Debate U.S Copyright Status:Text = Public domain. Audio = Uncertain.