[Audio differs from text] When going down the Tigris and Euphrates rivers many years ago with a party of English travelers I found myself under the direction of an old Arab guide whom wehired up at Baghdad, and I have often thought how that guide resembled our barbers in certainmental characteristics.  He thought that it was not only his duty to guide us down those rivers, and do what he was paid for doing, but to entertain us with stories curious and weird, ancient and modern strange, and familiar.  Many of them I haveforgotten, and I am glad I have, but there is one I shall never forget. The old guide was leading my camel by its halter along the banks of those ancient rivers, and he told me story after story until I grew weary of his story-telling andceased to listen.  I have never been irritated with that guide when he lost his temper as I ceased listening.  But I remember that he took off his Turkish cap and swung it in acircle to get my attention.  I could see it through the corner of my eye, but I determined not to look straight at him for fear he would tell another story.  But although I am nota woman, I did finally look, and as soon as I did he went right into another story. Said he, I will tell you a story now which I reserve for my particular friends.  When he emphasized the words particular friends, I listened and I have ever beenglad I did.  I really feel devoutly thankful, that there are 1,674 young men who have been carried through college by this lecture who are also glad that I did listen. The oldguide told me that there once lived not far from the River Indus an ancient Persian by the name of Ali Hafed.  He said that Ali Hafed owned a very large farm; that he hadorchards, grain-fields, and gardens; that he had money at interest and was a wealthy and contented man.  One day there visited that old Persian farmer one of thoseancient Buddhist priests, one of the wise men of the East.  He sat down by the fire and told the old farmer how this old world of ours was made.   He said that this world was once a mere bank of fog, and that the Almighty thrust Hisfinger into this bank of fog, and began slowly to move His finger around, increasing thespeed until at last Hewhirled this bank of fog into a solid ball of fire.  Then it went rolling through the universe, burning its way through other banks of fog, and condensed themoisture without,until it fell in floods of rain upon its hot surface, and cooled the outward crust.  Then the internal fires bursting outward through the crust threw up the mountainsand hills,the valleys, the plains and prairies of this wonderful world of ours.  If this internalmolten mass came bursting out and cooled very quickly, it became granite; less quicklycopper, less quickly silver, less quickly gold, and, after gold, diamonds were made.Said the old priest, A diamond is a congealed drop of sunlight. Now that is literallyscientifically true, that a diamond is an actual deposit of carbon from the sun.   The old priest told Ali Hafed that if he had one diamond the size of his thumb he could purchase the county, and if the had a mine of diamonds he could place his childrenupon thrones through the influence of their great wealth. Ali Hafed heard all about diamonds, how much they were worth, and went to his bed that night a poor man.  He had not lost anything, but he was poor because hewas discontented, and discontented because he feared he was poor.  He said, I want a mine of diamonds, and he lay awake all night.Early in the morning he sought out the priest. I know by experience that a priest is very cross when awakened early in the morning, and when he shook that oldpriest out of his dreams, Ali Hafed said to him:    "Will you tell me where I find diamonds?   "Diamonds!  What do you want with diamonds?   Why, I wish to be immensely rich.   Well, then, go along and find them.  That is all you have to do; go and findthem, and then you have them.   But I dont know where to go.   Well, if you will find a river that runs through white sands, between high mountains, in those white sandsyou will always find diamonds.   I dont believe there is any such river.   Oh yes, there are plenty of them.  All you have to do is to go and find them, and then you havethem.   Said Ali Hafed, I will go.   So he sold his farm, collected his money, left his family in charge of a neighbor, and away he went in search of diamonds.  He began his search, very properly tomy mind, at the Mountains of the Moon.  Afterward he came around into Palestine, then wandered on into Europe, and at last when his money was all spent and he was inrags, wretchedness, and poverty, he stood on the shore of that bay at Barcelona, in Spain, when a great tidal wave came rolling in between the pillars of Hercules, and thepoor, afflicted, suffering, dying man could not resist the awful temptation to cast himself intothat incoming tide, and he sank beneath its foaming crest, never to rise in thislife again. Then after that old guide had told me that awfully sad story, he stopped the camel I was riding on and went back to fix the baggage that was coming off another camel,and I had an opportunity to muse over his story while he was gone.  I remember saying to myself, Why did he reserve that story for his particular friends?  There seemedto be no beginning, no middle, no end, nothing to it.   That was the first story I had ever heard told in my life, and would be the first one I ever read, in which the hero waskilled in the first chapter.  I had but one chapter of that story, and the hero was dead.When the guide came back and took up the halter of my camel, he went right ahead with the story, into the second chapter, just as though there had been nobreak.   The man who purchased Ali Hafeds farm one day led his camel into the garden to drink, and as that camel put its nose into the shallow water of that gardenbrook, Ali Hafeds successor noticed a curious flash of light from the white sands of the stream.  He pulled out a black stone having an eye of light reflecting all the hues of therainbow.  He took the pebble into the house and put it on the mantel which covers the central fires, and forgot all about it. A few days later this same old priest came in to visit Ali Hafeds successor, and the moment he opened that drawing-room door he saw that flash of light on themantel, and he rushed up to it, and shouted:   Here is a diamond!  Has Ali Hafed returned? Oh no, Ali Hafed has not returned, and that is not a diamond.  That is nothingbut a stone we found right out here in our own garden. But, said the priest, I tell you I know a diamond when I see it.  I know positively that is a diamond. Then together they rushed out into that old garden and stirred up the white sands with their fingers, and lo! There came up other more beautiful and valuable gemsthen the first.  Thus, said the guide to me, was discovered the diamond-mine of Golconda, the most magnificent diamond-mine in allthe history of mankind, excelling the Kimberly itself.  The Kohinoor, and the Orloff of the crown jewels of England and Russia, the largest on earth, came from that mine. When that old Arab guide told me the second chapter of his story, he then took off his Turkish cap and swung it around in the air again to get my attention to themoral.  Those Arab guides have morals to their stories, although they are not always moral.  As he swung his hat, he said to me, Had Ali Hafed remained at home and dugin his own cellar, or underneath his own wheat fields or in his own garden, instead of wretchedness, starvation, and death by suicide in a strange land, he would have hadacres of diamonds. For every acre of that old farm, yes, every shovelful, afterward revealed gems which since have decorated the crowns of monarchs. When he had added the moral of his story I saw why he reserved it for his particular friends.  But I did not tell him that I could see it.  It was that mean old Arabsway of going around a thing like a lawyer, to say indirectly what he did not dare say directly, that in his private opinion there was a certain young man then traveling downthe Tigris River that might better be at home in America. I did not tell him I could see that, but I told it to him quick, and I think I will tell it to you. I told him of a man out in California in 1847, who owned a ranch. He heard they had discovered gold in southern California, and so with a passion for gold he sold his ranch to Colonel Sutter, and away he went, never to come back. Colonel Sutter put a mill upon a stream that ran through that ranch, and one day his little girl brought some wet sand from the raceway into their home and sifted it through her fingers before the fire, and in that falling sand a visitor saw the first shining scales of real gold that were ever discovered in California. The man who had owned that ranch wanted gold, and he could have secured it for the mere taking. Indeed, thirty-eight millions of dollars has been taken out of a very few acres since then.  About eight years ago I delivered this lecture in a city that stands on that farm, and they told me that a one-third owner for years and years had been getting one hundred and twenty dollars in gold every fifteen minutes, sleeping or waking, without taxation. You and I would enjoy an income like that -- if we didnt have to pay an income tax. But a better illustration really than that occurred here in our town of Pennsylvania.  If there is anything I enjoy above another on the platform, it is to get one of theseGerman audiences in Pennsylvania, and fire that at them, and I enjoy it tonight.  There was a man living in Pennsylvania, not unlike some Pennsylvanians you have seen,who owned a farm, and he did with that farm just what I should do with a farm if I owned one in Pennsylvania- he sold it.  But before he sold it he decided to secureemployment collecting coal-oil for his cousin, who was in the business in Canada, where they first discovered oil on this continent.  They dipped it from the running streamsat that early time.  So this Pennsylvania farmer wrote to his cousin asking for employment.  You see, friends, this farmer was not altogether a foolish man.  No, he wasnot.  He did not leave his farm until he had something else to do.  Of all the simpletons the stars shine on I dont know of a worse one than the man who leaves one jobbefore he has gotten another.  That has especial reference to my profession, and has no reference whatever to a man seeking a divorce.  When he wrote to his cousin foremployment, his cousin replied, I cannot engage you because you know nothing about the oil business.Well, then the old farmer said, I will know, and with most commendable zeal (characteristic of the students of Temple University) he sat himself at the study ofthe whole subject.  He began away back at the second day of Gods creation when this world was covered thick and deep with that rich vegetation which since has turnedto the primitive beds of coal.  He studied the subject until he found that the drainings really of those rich beds of coal furnished the coal-oil that was worth pumping, andthen he found how it came up with the living springs.  He studied until he knew what it looked like, smelled like, tasted like, and how to refine it.  Now said he in his letter tohis cousin, I understand the oil business.  His cousin answered, All right, come on. So he sold his farm, according to the county record, for $833 (even money, no cents).  He had scarcely gone from that place before the man who purchased thespot went out to arrange for the watering of the cattle.  He found the previous owner had gone out years before and put a plank across the brook back of the barn, edgewiseinto the surface of the water just a few inches.  The purpose of that plank at that sharp angle across the brook was to throw over to the other bank a dreadful-looking scumthrough which the cattle would not put their noses.  But with that plank there to throw it all over to one side, the cattle would drink below, and thus that man who had goneto Canada had been himself damming back for twenty-three years a flood of coal-oil which the state geologists of Pennsylvania declared to us ten years later was even thenworth a hundred millions of dollars to our state, a thousand millions of dollars.  The man who owned that territory on which the city to Titusville now stands, and thosePleasantville valleys, had studied the subject from the second day of Gods creation clear down to the present time.  He studied it until he knew all about it, and yet he issaid to have sold the whole of it for $833, and again I say, no sense. But I need another illustration.  I found it in Massachusetts, and I am sorry I did because that is the state I came from.  This young man in Massachusettsfurnishes just another phase of my thought.  He went to Yale College and studied mines and mining, and became such an adept as a mining engineer that he wasemployed by the authorities of the university to train students who were behind their classes.  During his senior years he earned $15 a week for doing that work.  When hegraduated they raised his pay from $15 to $45 a week, and offered him a professorship, as soon as they did he went right home to his mother.  If they had raised that boyspay from $14 to $15.60 he would have stayed and been proud of the place, but when they put it up to $45 at one leap, he said, Mother, I wont work for $45 a week.  Theidea of a man with a brain like mine working for $45 a week!  Lets go out to California and stake out gold-mines and silver-mines, and be immensely rich.Said his mother, Now, Charlie, it is just as well to be happy as it is to be rich.Yes, said Charlie, But it is just as well to be rich and happy too.  And they were both right about it.  As he was an only son and she a widow, of course he hadhis way.  They always do. They sold out in Massachusetts, and instead of going to California they went toWisconsin, where he went into the employ of the superior Copper Mining Company at $15 a week again, but with the proviso in his contract that he should have an interest in any mines he should discover for the company.  I dont believe he ever discovereda mine, and if I am looking in the face of any stockholder of that copper company you wish hehad discovered something or other.  I have friends who are not here because they could not afford a ticket, who did have stock in that company at the time this young man was employed there.  This young man went out there and I have not heard aword from him.  I dont know what became of him, and I dont know whether he found any mines or not, but I dont believe he ever did. But I do know the other end of the line.  He had scarcely gotten the other end of the old homestead before the succeeding owner went out to dig potatoes.  Thepotatoes were already growing in the ground when he bought the farm, and as the old farmer wasbringing in a basket of potatoes it hugged very tight between the ends of the stone fence.  You know in Massachusetts our farms are nearly all stone wall.  There you are obliged to be very economical of front gateways in order to have someplace to put the stone.  When that basket hugged so tight he set it down on the ground, and then dragged on one side, and pulled on the other side, and as he wasdragging that basket though this farmer noticed in the upper and outer corner of that stone wall, right next the gate, a block of native silver eight inches square.  Thatprofessor of mines, mining, and mineralogy who knew so much about the subject that he would not work for $45 a week, when he sold that homestead in Massachusettssat right on that silver to make the bargain.  He was born on that homestead, was brought up there, and had gone back and forth rubbing the stone with his sleeve until itreflected his countenance, and seemed to say, Here is a hundred thousand dollars right down here just for the taking.  But he would not take it.  It was in a home inNewburyport, Massachusetts, and there was no silver there, all away off-well, I dont know were, and he did not, but somewhere else, and he was a professor ofmineralogy. My friends, that mistake is very universally made, and why should we even smile at him.  I often wonder what has become of him.  I do not know at all, but I will tellyou what I guess as a Yankee.  I guess that he sits out there by his fireside to-night with his friends gathered around him, and he is saying to them something like this:Do you know that man Conwell who lives in Philadelphia?  Oh yes, I have heard of him. Do you know of that man Jones that lives in Philadelphia?  Yes, I have heard ofhim, too. Then he begins to laugh, and shakes his sides, and says to his friends, Well, they have done just the same thing I did, precisely-and that spoils the whole joke,for you and I have done the same thing he did, and while we sit here and laugh at him he has a better right to sit out there and laugh at us.  I know I have made the samemistakes, but, of course, that does not make any difference, because we dont expect the same man to preach and practice, too. As I come here to-night and look around this audience I am seeing again what through these fifty years I have continually seen  men that are making preciselythat same mistake.  I often wish I could see the younger people, and would that the Academy had been filled to-night with our high school scholars and ourgrammar-school scholars, that I could have them to talk to.  While I would have preferred such an audience as that,because they are most susceptible, as they have not gotten into any custom that they cannot break, they have not met with any failures as we have; and while I could perhaps do such an audience as that more good than Ican do grown-up people, yet I will do the best I can with the material I have.  I say to you that you have acres of diamonds in Philadelphia right where you now live. Oh,but you will say, you cannot know much about your city if you think there are any acres of diamonds here. I was greatly interested in that account in the newspaper of the young man who found that diamond in North Carolina.  It was one of the purest diamonds that hasever been discovered, and it has several predecessors near the same locality.  I went to adistinguished professor in mineralogy and asked him where he thought those diamonds came from.  The professor secured the map of the geologic formations of our continent, and traced it.  He said it went either through the underlying carboniferousstrata adapted for such production, westward through Ohio and the Mississippi, or in more probability came eastward through Virginia and up the shore of the AtlanticOcean.  It is a fact that the diamonds were there, for they have been discovered and sold; and that they were carried down there during the drift period, from some northernlocality.  Now who can say but some person going down with his drill in Philadelphia will find some trace of adiamond-mine yet down here?  Oh, friends! You cannot say that you are not over one of the greatest diamond-mines in the world, for such a diamond as that only comes from the most profitable mines that are found on earth. But it serves to simply to illustrate my thought, which I emphasize by saying if you do not have the actual diamond-mines literally you have all that they would begood for to you.  Because now that the Queen of England has given the greatest compliment everconferred upon American woman for her attire because she did not appear with any jewels at all at the late reception in England, it has almost done away with the use of diamonds anyhow.  All you would care for would be the few youwould wear if you wish to be modest, and the rest of you would sell for money. Now then, I say again that the opportunity to get rich, to attain unto great wealth, is here in Philadelphia now, within the reach of almost every man and woman whohears me speak to-night, and I mean just what I say.  I have not come to this platform even under these circumstances to recite something to you.  I have come to tell youwhat in Gods sight I believe to be the truth, and if the years of life have been of any value to me in the attainment of common sense, I know I am right; that the men andwomen sitting here, who found it difficult perhaps to buy a ticket to this lecture or gathering to-night, have within their reach acres of diamonds, opportunities to get largelywealthy.  There never was a place on earth more adapted than the city of Philadelphia to-day, and never in the history of the world did a poor man without capital have suchan opportunity to get rich quickly and honestly as he has now in our city.  I say it is the truth, and I want you to accept it as such; for if you think I have come to simplyrecite something, then I would better not be here.  I have no time to waste in any such talk, but to say the things I believe, and unless some of you get richer for what I amsaying to night my time is wasted. I say that you ought to get rich, and it is our duty to get rich.  How many of my piousbrethren say to me, Do you, a Christian minister, spend your time going upand down the country advising young people to get rich, to get money?  Yes, of course I do.  Theysay, Isnt that awful! Why dont you preach the gospel instead ofpreaching about mans making money?  Because to make money honestly is to preach the gospel.  That is thereason.  The men who get rich may be the most honestmen you find in the community. Oh, but says some young man here to-night, I have been told all my life that if aperson has money he is very dishonest and dishonorable and mean and contemptible. My friend, that is the reason why you have none, because you have that idea of people.The foundation of your faith is altogether false.  Let me say here clearly, and say it briefly, though subject to discussion which I have not time for here, ninety-eight out of onehundred of the rich men of America are honest.  That is why they are rich.  That is why they carry on great enterprises and find plenty of people to work with them.  It is because they are honest men. Says another young man, I hear sometimes of men that get millions of dollarsdishonestly.  Yes, of course you do, and so do I.  But they are so rare a thing infact that the newspapers talk about them all the time as a matter of news until you get the ideathat all the other rich men got rich dishonestly. My friend, you take and drive meif you furnish the auto-out into the suburbs ofPhiladelphia, and introduce me to the people who own their homes around this greatcity, those beautiful homes with gardens and flowers, those magnificent homes so lovely intheir art, and I will introduce you to the very best people in character as well asin enterprise in our city, and you know I will. A man is not really a true man until he ownshis own home, and they that own their homes are made more honorable and honest and pure, true and economical and careful, by owning the home. For a man to have money, even in large sum, is not an inconsistent thing.  We preachagainst covetousness, and you know we do, in the pulpit, and oftentimes preach against it so long and use the terms about filthy lucre: so extremely that Christians get the ideathat when we stand in the pulpit we believe it is wicked for any man to have moneyuntil the collection-basket goes around, and then we almost swear at the people because they dont give more money.  Oh, the inconsistency of suchdoctrines as that! Money is power, and you ought to be reasonably ambitious to have it.  You oughtbecause you can do more good with it than you could without it.  Money printed your Bible, money builds your churches, money sends your missionaries, and money paysyour preachers, and you would not have many of them, either, if you did not pay them.  I am always willing that my church should raise my salary, because the church that pays the largest salary always raises it the easiest.  You never knew anexception to it in your life. The man who gets the largest salary can do the most good with the power that isfurnished to him.  Of course he can if his spirit be right to use it for what it is given to him. I say, then, you ought to have money. If you can honestly attain unto riches inPhiladelphia, it is our Christian and godly duty to do so.  It is an awful mistake ofthese pious people to think you must be awfully poor in order to be pious. Some men say, Dont you sympathize with the poor people?  of course I do, or else Iwould not have been lecturing these years.  I wont give in but what I sympathize with the poor, but the number of poor who are to be with is very small.  To sympathize with a man whom God has punished for his sins, thus to help him whenGod would still continue a just punishment, is to do wrong, no doubt about it, and we do that more than we helpthose who are deserving.  While we should sympathize with Gods poor-that is, those who cannot help themselves-let us remember that is not a poor person in the United Stateswho was not made poor by his own shortcomings, or by the shortcomings of some one else.  It is all wrong to be poor, anyhow.  Let us give in to that argument and pass that to one side. A gentleman gets up back there, and says, Dont you think there are some things in this world that are better than money?  Of course I do, but I am talking aboutmoney now.  Of course there are some things higher than money.  Oh yes, I know by the grave that has left me standing alone that there are some things in this world thatare higher and sweeter and purer than money.  Well do I know there are some things higher and grander than gold.  Love is the grandest thing on Gods earth, but fortunatethe lover who has plenty of money.  Money is power, money is force, money will do good as harm.  In the hands of good men and women it could accomplish, and it hasaccomplished, good. I hate to leave that behind me.  I heard a man get up in a prayer-meeting in our city and thank the Lord he was one of Gods poor.  Well, I wonder what his wifethinks about that?  She earns all the money that comes into that house, and he smokes a part of that on the veranda.  I dont want to see any more of the Lords poor ofthat kind, and I dont believe the Lord does.  And yet there are some people who think in order to be pious you must be awfully poor and awfully dirty.  That does not followat all.  While we sympathize with the poor, let us not teach a doctrine like that. Yet the age is prejudiced against advising a Christian man (or, as a Jew would say, agodly man) from attaining unto wealth.  The prejudice is so universal and the years are far enough back, I think, for me to safely mention that years ago up at Temple Universitythere was a young man in our theological school who thought he was the only pious student in that department.  He came into my office on evening and sat down by my desk, and said to me:  Mr. President, I think it is my duty sir, to comein and labor with you.  What has happened now?  Said he, I heard you say at the Academy, at the pierceSchool commencement, that you thought it was an honorable ambition for a young man to desire to have wealth, and that you thought it made him temperate, made him anxious to have a good name, and made him industrious.  Youspoke to make him a good man.  Sir, I have come to tell you the Holy Bible says that money is the root of all evil.I told him I had never seen it in the Bible, and advised him to go out into the chapel and get the Bible, and show me the place.  So out he went for the Bible, andsoon he stalked into my office with the Bible open, with all the bigoted pride of the narrow sectarian, of one who founds his Christianity on some misinterpretation ofScripture.  He flung the Bible down on my desk, and fairly squealed into my ear:  There it is Mr. President; you can read ityourself.  I said to him: Well young man, you will learn when you get a little older that you cannot trust another denomination to read the Bible for you.  You belong to another denomination.  You are taught in thetheological school, however, that emphasis is the exegesis.  Now, will you take that Bible and read it yourself, and give the proper emphasis to it? He took the Bible, and proudly read, The love of money is the root of all evil.Then he had it right, and when one does quote aright from that same old Book he quotes theabsolute truth.  I have lived through fifty years of the mightiest battlethat old Book has ever fought, and I have lived to see its banners flying free; for never in the history of thisworld did the great minds of earth so universally agree that the Bible is true-all true-asthey do at this very hour. So I say that when he quoted right, of course he quoted the absolute truth.  The love ofmoney is the root of all evil.  He who tries to attain unto it too quickly, ordishonestly, will fall into many snares, no doubt about that.  The love of money.  What is that?  It is making an idol of money, and idolatry pure and simple every where iscondemned by the Holy Scriptures and by mans common sense.  The man that worships the dollar instead ofthinking of the purposes for which it ought to be used, the man who idolizes simply money, the miser that hordes his money in the cellar, or hides it in his staking, or refuses to invest it where it will do the world good, that man whohugs the dollar until the eagle squeals has in him the root of all evil. I think I will leave that behind me now and answer the question of nearly all of you who are asking, Is there opportunity to get rich in Philadelphia?  Well, now, howsimple a thing it is to see where it is, and the instant you see where it is it is yours.  Some oldgentleman gets up back there and says, Mr. Conwell, have you lived in Philadelphia for thirty-one years and dont know that the time has gone by when you can make anythingin this city?  No, I dont think it is.  Yes, it is; I have tried it. What business are you in?  I kept a store here for twenty years, and never made a thousand dollars in the whole twenty years.Well, then, you can measure the good you have been to this city by what this city has paid you, because a man can judge very well what he is worth by what hereceives that is, in what he is to the world at this time.  If you have not made over a thousand dollars in twenty years in Philadelphia, it would have been better forPhiladelphia if they had kicked you out of the city nineteen years and nine months ago.  A man has no right to keep a store in Philadelphia twenty years and notmake atleast five hundred thousand dollars, even thought it be a corner grocery-up-town.You say, You cannot make five hundred thousand dollars in a store now.  Oh, myfriends, if you will just take only four blocks around you, and find out what the peoplewant and what you ought to supply them, you would very soon see it.  There is wealthright within the sound of your voice. Some one says:  You dont know anything about business.  A preacher never knows a thing about business.  Well, then I will have to prove that I am an expert.  Idont like to do this, but I have to do it because my testimony will not be taken if I am not an expert.  My father kept a country store, and if there is any place under thestars where a man gets all sorts of experience in every kind of mercantile transactions, it is in the country store.  Iam not proud of my experience, but sometimes when my father was away he would leave me in charge of the store, thought fortunately for him that was not very often.  But this did occur many times, friends: A man wouldcome onto the store, and say to me, Do you keep jack-knives?  No we dont keep jack-knives, and I went off whistling a tune.  What did I care about that man, anyhow? Then another farmer would come in and say, Do you keep jack-knives?  No, we dont keep jack-knives.  Then I went away and whistled another tune.  Then a thirdman came right in the same door and said, Do you keep jack-knives?  No.  Why is every onearound here asking for jack-knives?  Do you suppose we are keeping this store to supplythe whole neighborhood with jack-knives?  Do you carry on your store like that inPhiladelphia?  The difficulty was I had not then learned that the foundation of godliness and the foundation principle of success in business are both the same precisely.  Theman who says, I cannot carry my religion into business advertises himself either asbeing an imbecile in business, or on the road to bankruptcy, or a thief, one of the three,sure.  He will fail within a very few years.  He certainly will if he doesnt carry his religioninto business.  If I had been carrying on my fathers store on a Christian plan, godly plan, Iwould have had a jack-knife for the third man when he called for it.  Then I would haveactually done him a kindness, and I would have received a reward myself, which it would have been my duty to take. There are some over-pious Christian people who think if you take any profit on anything you sell that you are an unrighteous man.  On the contrary, you would be acriminal to sell goods for less than they cost.  You have no right to do that.  You cannot trust a man with your money who cannot take care of his own.  You cannot trust aman in your family that is not true to his wife.  You cannot trust a man in the world that does not begin with his own heart, his own character, and his own life.  It wouldhave been my duty to have furnished a jack-knife to the third, man or to the second, and to have sold it to him and actually profited myself.  I have no more right to sellgoods without making a profit on them than I have to overcharge him dishonestly beyond what they are worth.  But I should so sell each bill of goods that the person towhom I sell shall make as much as I make. To live and let live is the principle of the gospel, and the principle of every-day common sense.  Oh, young man, hear me; live as you go along.  Do not wait untilyou have reached my years before you begin to enjoy anything of this life. If I had the millions back, of fiftycents of it, which I have tried to earn in these years, it would not do me anything like the good that it does me now in this almost sacred presence to-night.  Oh, yes, I am paid over and over a hundredfold to-night for dividing as I have triedto do in some measure as I went along through the years.  I ought not to speak that way, it sounds egotistic, but I am old enough now to be excused for that.  I shouldhave helped my fellow-men, which I have tried to do, and everyone should try to do, and get the happiness of it.  The man who goes home with the sense that he has stolena dollar that day, that he has robbed a man of what was his honest due, is not going home to sweet rest.  He arises tired in the morning, and goes with an uncleanconscience to his work the next day.  He is not a successful man at all, although he may have laid up millions.  But the man who has gone through life dividing always withis fellow-men, making and demanding his own rights and his own profits, and giving to every other man his rights and profits, lives every day, and not only that, but it is theroyal road to great wealth.  The history of the thousands of millionaires shows that to be the case. Then man over there who said he could not make anything in a store in Philadelphia has been carrying on his store on the wrong principle.  Suppose I go into yourstore to-morrow morning and ask, Do you know a neighbor A, who lives one square away, at house No.1240?  Oh yes, I have met him.  He deals here at the corner store.  Where did he come from?  I dont know.  How many does he have in his family?  I dont know.  What ticket does he vote?  I dont know.  What churchdoes he go to?  I dont know, and dont care.  What are you asking all these questions for? If you had a store in Philadelphia would you answer me like that?  If so, then you areconducting your business just as I carried on my fathers business in Worthington, Massachusetts.  You dont know where your neighbor came from when he moved toPhiladelphia, and you dont care.  If you had cared you would rich by now.  If you had cared enough about him to take an interest in his affairs, to find out what he needed, you would have been rich.  But you go through the world saying, Noopportunity to get rich, and there is the fault right at your door. But another young man gets up over there and says,  I cannot take the mercantilebusiness, (While I am talking of trade it applies to every occupation.)  Whycan't you go into the mercantile business?  Because I havent any capital.  Oh, the weak and dudish creature that can't see over its collar!  It makes a person weak tosee these little dudes standing around the corners and saying, Oh, if I had plenty of capital, how rich would Iget.  Young man, do you think you are going to get rich on capital?  Certainly.  Well, I say, Certainly not.  If your mother has plenty of money, and she will set you up inbusiness, you will set her up in business, supplying you with capital. The moment a young man or woman gets more money than he or she has grown to by practical experience, that moment he has gotten a curse.  It is no help to ayoung man or woman to inherit money.  It is no help to your children to leave them money, but if youleave them education, if you leave them Christian and noble character, if you leave them a wide circle of friends, if you leave them an honorable name, it is far better than that they should have money.  It would be worse for them, worse for thenation, that they should have any money at all. Oh, young man, if you have inherited money, dont regard it as a help.  It will curse you through your years, and deprive youof the very best things of human life.  There is no class of people to be pitied so much as the inexperienced sons and daughters of the rich of our generation.  I pity the richmans son. He can never know the best things in life. One of the best things in our life is when a young man has earned his own living, and when he becomes engaged to some lovely young woman, and makes up hismind to have a home of his own.  Then with that same love comes also that divine inspirationtoward better things, and he begins to save his money.  He begins to leave off his bad habits and put money in the bank.  When he has a few hundred dollars he goes out in thesuburbs to look for a home.  He goes to the savings-bank, perhaps, for half of the value, and then goes for his wife, and when he takes his bride over the threshold of that door forthe first time he says in words of eloquence my voice can never touch:   I have earned this home myself.  It is all mine, and I divide with thee.  That is the grandest moment ahuman heart may ever know. But a rich mans son can never know that.  He takes his bride into a finer mansion, it maybe, but he is obliged to go all the way through it and say to his wife, My mother gave me that, my mother gave me that, and my mother gave me this, until his wife wishes shehad married his mother.  I pity the rich mans son. The statistics of Massachusetts showed that not one rich mans son out of seventeenever dies rich.  I pity the rich mans sons unless they have the good sense ofthe elder Vanderbilt, which sometimes happens.  He went to his father and said, Did you earn allyour money?  I did, my son.  I began to work on a ferry-boat for twenty-five cents a day.  Then, said his son, I will have none of your money, and he, too, tried to getemployment on a ferry-boat that Saturday night.  He could not get one there, but he did get a place for three dollars a week.  Of course, if a rich mans son will do that, he will get the discipline of a poor boy that is worth more than auniversity education to any man.  He would then be able to take care of the millions of his father.  But as a rule the rich men will not let their sons do the very thing thatmade them great.  As a rule, the rich man will not allow his son to work-and his mother!  Why, she would think it was a social disgrace if her poor, weak, little lily-fingered,sissy sort of a boy had to earn his living with honest toil.  I have no pity for such rich mens sons. I remember one at Niagara Falls.  I think I remember one a great deal nearer.  I think there are gentlemen present who were at a great banquet, and I beg pardon ofhis friends.  At a banquet here in Philadelphia there sat beside me a kind-hearted young man, and he said, Mr. Conwell, you have been sick for two or three years.  Whenyou go out, take my limousine, and it will take you up to your house on Broad Street.  I thanked him very much, and perhaps I ought not to mention the incident in thisway, but I follow the facts.  I got on to the seat with the driver of that limousine, outside, and when we were going up I asked the driver, How much did this limousinecost?  Six thousand eight hundred, and he had to pay the duty on it.  Well, I said, does the owner of this machine ever drive it himself?  At that the chauffeur laughedso heartily that he lost control of his machine.  He was so surprised at the question that he ran up on the sidewalk, and around a cornerlamp-post into the street again. And when he got into the street he laughed till the whole machine trembled.  He said:  He drive this machine!  Oh, he would be lucky if he knew enough to get our when weget there. I must tell you about a rich mans son at Niagara Falls.  I came in from the lecture to the hotel, and as I approached the desk of the clerk there stood a millionairesson from New York.  He was an indescribable specimen of anthropologic potency. He had a skull-cap on one side of his head, with a gold tassel in the top of it, and agold-headed cane under his arm with more in it than in his head.  It is a very difficult thing to describe that young man.  He wore an eye-glass that he could not seethrough, patent-leather boots that he could not walk in, and pants that he could not sit down in-dressed like a grasshopper.  Thishuman cricket came up to the clerks desk just as I entered, adjusted his unseeingeye-glass, and spake in this wise to the clerk.  You see, he thought it was Hinglish, you know, to lisp.  Thir, will you havethe kindness to supply me with thome papah and enwelophs!  The hotel clerk measured the man quick, and he pulled the envelopes and paper out of a drawer, threw themacross the counter toward the young man, and then turned away to his books.  You should have seen that young man when those envelopes came across that counter. He swelled up like a gobbler turkey, adjusted his unseeing eye-glass, and yelled:  Come right back here.  Now, thir, will you order a thervant to take that papah andenwelophs to yondah dethk.  Oh, the poor, miserable, contemptible American monkey!  He could not carry paper and envelopes twenty feet.  I suppose he could not gethis arms down to do it. I have no pity for such travesties upon human nature.  If you have not capital, young man, I am glad of it.  What you need is common sense, notcopper cents. The best thing I can do is to illustrate by actual facts well known to you all.  A.T. Stewart, a poor boy in New York, had $1.50 to begin life on.  He lost 87 cents ofthat on the very first venture.  How fortunate that young man who loses the first time he gambles.  That boy said,  I will never gamble again in business, and he never did. How came he to lose 87 cents?  You probably all know the story how he lost it-because he bought some needles, threads, and buttons to sell which people did not want,and had them left on his hands, a dead loss.  Said the boy, I will not lose any more money in that way.  Then he went around first to the doors and asked the people whatthey did want.  Then when he had found out what they wanted he invested his 62 cents to supply aknown demand.  Study it wherever you choose-in business, in your profession, in your housekeeping, whatever your life, that one thing is the secret of success.  You must first know the demand.  You must first know what people need, andthen invest yourself where you are most needed.  A.T. Stewart went on that principle until he was worth whatamounted afterward to forty millions of dollars, owning the very store in which Mr. Wanamaker carries on his great work in New York.  His fortune was made by his losing something, which taught him the great lesson that he must onlyinvest himself or his money in something that people need.  When will you salesmen learn it?  When will youmanufactures learn that you must know the changing needs of humanity if you would succeed in life?  Apply yourselves, all you Christian people, as manufactures ormerchants or workmen to supply that human need.  It is a great principle as broad as humanity and as deep as the Scripture itself. The best illustration I ever heard was of John Jacob Astor.  You know that he made the money of the Astor family when he lived in New York.  He came across thesea in debt for his fare.  But that poor boy with nothing in his pocket made the fortune of the Astor family on one principle.  Some young man here to-night will say, Well,they could make these over in New York, but they could not do it in Philadelphia!  My friends, did you ever read that wonderful book of Riss (his memory is sweet to usbecause of his recent death), wherein is given his statistical account of the records taken in 1889 of 107 millionaires of New York.  If you read the account you will see thatout of the 107 millionaires only seven made their money in New York.  Out of the 107 millionaires worth ten million dollars in real estate then, 67 of them made their moneyin towns of less than 3,500 inhabitants.  The richest man in this country to-day, if you read the real-estate values, has never moved away from a town of 3,500 inhabitants. It makes not so much difference where you are as who you are.  But if you cannot get rich in Philadelphia you certainly cannot do it in New York.Now John Jacob Astor illustrated what can be done anywhere.  He had a mortgage once on a millinery-store, and they could not sell bonnets enough to pay theinterest on his money.  So he foreclosed that mortgage, took possession of the store, and went in to partnership with the very same people, in the very same store, withthe same capital.  He did not give them a dollar of capital.  They had to sell goods to get any money.  Then he left them alone in the store just as they had been before,and he went out and sat down on a bench in the park in the shade.  What was John Jacob Astor doing out there, and in partnership with people who had failed on his ownhands?  Had the most important and, to my mind, the most pleasant part of that partnership on his hands.  For as John Jacob Astor sat on that bench he was watching theladies as they went by; and where is the man who would not get rich at that business?  As he sat on the bench if a lady passed him with her shoulders back and head up,and looked straight to the front, as if she did not care if all the world did gaze on her, then he studied her bonnet, and by the time it was out of sight he know the shape ofthe frame, the color of the trimmings, and the crinklings in the feather.  I sometimes try to describe a bonnet, but not always.  I would not try to describe a modern bonnet. Where is the man that could describe one?  This aggregation of all sorts of driftwoodstuck on the back of the head, or the side of the neck, like a rooster with only one tailfeather left.  But in John Jacob Astors day there was some art about the millinerybusiness, and he went to the millinery-store and said to them:  Now put into theshow-window just such a bonnet as I describe to you, because I have already seen a ladywho likes such a bonnet.  Dont make up any more until I come back.  Then hewent out and sat down again, and another lady passed him of a different form, of a differentcomplexion, with a different shape and color of bonnet.  Now, said he, putsuch a bonnet as that in the show-window.  He did not fill his show-window up-town with a lot ofhats and bonnets to drive people away, and then sit on the back stairs and bawl because people went to Wanamakers to trade.  He did not have a hat or a bonnet in thatshow-window but what some lady liked before it was made up.  The tide of custom began immediately to turn in, and that has been the foundation of the greatest store in New Yorkin that line, and still exists as one of three stores.  Its fortune was made by John Jacob Astor after they had failed in business, not by giving them any more money, but byfinding out what the ladies liked for bonnets before they wasted any material in making them up.  I tell you if a man could foresee the millinery business he could foreseeanything under heaven! Suppose I were to go through this audience to-night and ask you in this greatmanufacturing city if there are not opportunities to get rich in manufacturing.  Ohyes,  some young man says, there are opportunities here still if you build with some trust andif you have two or three millions of dollars to begin with as capital.  Youngman, the history of the breaking up of the trusts by that attack upon big business is onlyillustrating what is now the opportunity of the smaller man.  The time never camein the history of the world when you could get rich so quickly manufacturing without capital asyou can now. But you will say, You cannot do anything of the kind.  You cannot start without capital.  Young man, let me illustrate for a moment.  I must do it.  It is my duty toevery young man, and woman, because we are all going into business very soon on the same plan.  Young man, remember if you know what people need you have gottenmore knowledge of a fortune than any amount of capital can give you. There was a poor man out of work living in Hingham, Massachusetts.  He lounged around the house until one day his wife told him to get out and work, and, as helived in Massachusetts, he obeyed his wife.  He went out and sat down on the shore of the bay, and whittled a soaked shingle into a wooden chain.  His children thatevening quarreled over it, and he whittled a second one to keep peace.  While he was whittling the second one a neighbor came in and said:  Why dont you whittle toysand sell them?  You could make money doing that.  Oh, he said, I would not know what to make.  Why dont you ask your own children right here in your own housewhat to make?  What is the use of trying that?  said the carpenter.  My children are different from other peoples children.  (I used to see people like that when I taughtschool.)  But he acted upon the hint, and the next morning when Mary came down the stairway, he asked, What do you want for a toy?  She begin to tell him she wouldlike a dolls bed, a dolls washstand, and went on with a list of things that would take him a lifetime to supply.  So, consulting his own children, in his own house, he tookthe firewood, for he had no money to buy lumber, and whittled those strong, unpainted Hingham toys that were that were for so many yearsknown all over the world.  Than man began to make those toys for his own children, and then made copies and sold them through the boot-and-shoe store next door.  He began to make a little money,and then a little more, and Mr. Lawson, in is Frenzied Finance says that man is the richest man in old Massachusetts, and I think it is the truth.  And that man is worth ahundred millions of dollars to-day, and has been only thirty-four years making it on that one principle-that one must judge that what his own children like at home otherpeoples children would like in their homes, too; to judge the human heart by oneself, by ones wife or by ones children.  It is the royal road to success inmanufacturing. Oh, But you say, didnt he have any capital?  Yes, a penknife, but I dont know that he had paid for that. I spoke thus to an audience in New Britain, Connecticut, and a lady four seats back went home and tried to take off her collar, and the collar-button stuck in thebuttonhole.  She threw it out and said,  I am going to get up something better than that to put on collars.  Her husband said:  After what Conwell said to-night, you seethere is a need of an improved collar-fastener that is easier to handle.  There is a human need; there is a great fortune.  Now, then, get up a collar-button and get rich.  Hemade fun of her, and consequently made fun of me, and that is one of the saddest things which comes overme like a deep cloud of midnight sometimes-although I have worked so hard for more than half a century, yet how little I have ever really done.  Notwithstanding the greatness and the handsomeness of your compliment to-night, I donot believe there is one in ten of you that is going to make a million of dollars because you are here to-night; but it is notmy fault, it is yours.  I say that sincerely.  What is the use of my talking if people never do what I advise them to do?  When her husband ridiculed her, she made up her mind shewould make a better collar-button, and when a woman makes up her mind she will, anddoes not say anything about it, she does it.  It was that New England woman who invented the snap button which you can findanywhere now.  It was a collar-button with a spring cap attached to the outer side.  Any of you who wear modern waterproofs know thebutton that simply pushes together, and when you unbutton it you simply pull it apart.  That is the button to which I refer, and which she invented.  She afterward invented severalother buttons, and then invested in more, and then was taken into partnership with great factories.  Now that woman goes over the sea every summer in her private steamship-yes,and takes her husband with her!  If her husband were to die, she would have moneyenough to buy a foreign duke or count or some such title as that at the latest quotations. Now what is my lesson in that incident?  It is this:  I told her then, though I did not know her, what I say to you, Your wealth is too near to you.  You are lookingright over it; and she had to look over it because it was right under her chin. I have read in the newspaper that a woman never invented anything.  Well, that newspaper ought to begin again.  Of course, I do not refer to gossip-I refer tomachines-and if I did I might better include the men.  That newspaper could never appear if women had notinvented something.  Friends, think.  Ye women, think!  You say you cannot make a fortune because you are in some laundry, or running a sewing-machine it may be, or walkingbefore some loom, and yet you can be a millionaire if you will but follow this almost infallible direction. When you say a woman doesnt invent anything, I ask, Who invented the Jacquard loom that wove every stitch you wear?  Mrs. Jacquard. The printers roller, theprinting press, were invented by farmers wives.  Who invented the cotton-gin of the South that enriched our country so amazingly?  Mrs. General Green invented the cottongin and showed the idea to Mr. Whitney, and he like a man, seized it. Who was it that invented thesewing-machine?  If I would go to school tomorrow and ask your children they would say, Elias Howe. He was in the Civil War with me, and often in my tent, and I often heard him say that he worked fourteen years to get up that sewing-machine.  But his wife madeup her mind one day they would starve to death if there wasnt something or other invented pretty soon,and so in two hours she invented the sewing-machine.  Of course he took out the patent in his name.  Men always do that.  Who was it that invented the mower and the reaper?According to Mr. McCormicks confidential communication, so recently published, it was a West Virginia woman, who, after his father and he had failed altogether in making areaper and gave it up, took a lot of shears and nailed them together on the edge of a board, with one shaft of each pair loose, and then wired them so that when she pulled thewire the other way it opened them, and there she had the principle of the mowing-machine.  If you look at a mowing-machine, you will see it is nothing but a lot ofshears.  If a woman can invent a mowing-machine, if a woman can invent a Jacquardloom, if a woman can invent a cotton-gin, if a woman can invent a trolley switch-as shedid and made the trolleys possible; if a woman can invent, as Mr. Carnegie said, the great iron squeezers that laid the foundation of all the steel millions of the United States,we men can invent anything under the stars!  I say that for the encouragement of themen. Who are the great inventors of the world?  Again this lesson comes before us.  The great inventor sits next to you, or you are the person yourself.  Oh, but youwill say, I have never invented anything in my life.  Neither did the great inventors until they discoveredone great secret.  Do you think that it is a man with a head like a bushel measure or aman like a stroke of lighting?  It is neither.  The really great man is a plain, straightforward,every-day, common-sense man.  You would not dream that he was a great inventor if you did not see something he had actually done.  His neighbors do not regard him so great. You never see anything great over your back fence. True greatness is often unrecognized.  That is sure.  You do not know anything about the greatest men and women.  I went out to write the life of General Garfield,and a neighbor, knowing I was in a hurry, and as there was a great crowd around the front door, took mearound to General Garfields back door and shouted, Jim!  Jim! And very soon Jimcame to the door and let me in, and I wrote the biography of one of the grandest men ofthe nation, and yet he was just the same old Jim to his neighbor.  If you know a greatman in Philadelphia and you should meet him to-morrow, you would say, How are you,Sam?  or Good morning, Jim.  Of course you would.  That is just what you would do.       One of my soldiers in the Civil War had been sentenced to death, and I went up to the White House in Washington-sent there for the first time in my life-to see thePresident.  I went into the waiting-room and sat down with a lot of others on the benches, and thesecretary asked one after another to tell him what they wanted.  After the secretary had been through the line, he went in, and then came back to the door and motioned for me.  I went up to that anteroom, and the secretary said: That is thePresidents door right over there.  Just rap on it and go right in.  I was never so taken aback, friends, in all my life,never.  The secretary himself made it worse for me, because he had told me how to go in and then went out another door to the left and shut that.  There I was, in the hallway bymyself before the President of the United States of Americas door.  I had been on fields of battle, where the shells did sometimes shriek and the bullets did sometimes hit me, but Ialways wanted to run.  I have no sympathy with the old man who says, I would just assoon march up into the cannons mouth as eat my dinner.  I have no faith in a man whodoesnt know enough to be afraid when he is being shot at.  I never was so afraid when theshells came around us at Antietam as I was when I went into that room that day; but Ifinally mustered the courage-I dont know how I ever did-and at arms length tapped on thedoor.  The man inside did not help me at all, but yelled out, Come in and sit down! Well, I went in and sat down on the edge of a chair, and wished I were in Europe, and the man at the table did not look up.  He was one of the worlds greatestmen, and was made great by one single rule.  Oh, that all the young people of Philadelphia were before menow and I could say just this one thing, and that they would remember it.  I would give a lifetime for the effect it would have on our city and on civilization.  Abraham Lincolnsprinciple for greatness can be adopted by nearly all.  This was his rule:  Whatsoever he had to do at all, he put his whole mind in to it and held it and held it all there until thatwas all done.  That makes men great almost anywhere.  He stuck to those papers at that table and did not look up at me, and I sat there trembling.  Finally, when he put the stringaround his papers, he pushed them over to one side and looked over at me, and a smile came over his worn face.  He said:  I am a very busy man and have only a few minutes tospare.  Now tell me in the fewest words what it is you want.  I began to tell him, andmentioned the case, and he said:  I have heard all about it and you do not need to sayany more.  Mr. Stanton was talking to me only a few days ago about that.  You can go to the hotel and rest assured that the President never did sign an order to shoot a boy undertwenty years of age, and never will.  You can say that to his mother anyhow. Then he said to me, How is it going in the field?  I said, We sometimes getdiscouraged.  And he said:  It is all right.  We are going to win out now.  We aregetting very near the light.  No man ought to wish to be President of the United States, and I willbe glad when I get through; the Tad and I are going out to Springfield, Illinois.  I havebought a farm out there and I dont care if I again earn only twenty-five cents a day.  Tadhas a mule team, and we are going to plant onions. Then he asked me, Were you brought up on a farm?  I said, Yes; in the Berkshire Hills of Massachusetts.  He then threw his leg over the corner of the big chairand said, I have heard many a time, ever since I was young, that up there in those hills you have tosharpen the noses of the sheep in order to get down to the grass between the rocks.  He was so familiar, so everyday, so farmer-like, that I felt right at home with him at once. He then took hold of another roll of paper, and looked up at me and said, Good morning.  I took the hint then and got up and went out.  After I had gotten out Icould not realize I had seen the President of the United States at all.  But a few days later, when still in the city, I saw the crowd pass through the East Room by the coffinof Abraham Lincoln, and when I looked at the upturned face of the murdered President I felt then that the man Ihad seen such a short time before, who, so simple a man, so plain a man, was one of the greatest men that God ever raised up to lead a nation on to ultimate liberty.  Yet hewas only Old Abe to his neighbors.  When they had the second funeral, I was invited among others, and went out to see that some coffin put back in the tomb at Springfield.   Of course that is all they would say.      Did you ever see a man who struts around altogether too large to notice an ordinary working mechanic?  Do you think he is great?  He is nothing but a puffed-upballoon, held down by his big feet.  There is no greatness there. Who are the great men and women?  My attention was called the other day to the history of a verylittle thing that made the fortune of a very poor man.  It was an awful thing, and yetbecause of that experience he-not a great inventor or genius-invented the pin that now iscalled the safety-pin, and out of that safety-pin made the fortune of one of the greataristocratic families of this nation. A poor man in Massachusetts who had worked in the nail-works was injured atthirty-eight, and he could earn but little money.  He was employed in the office torub out the marks on the bills made by pencil memorandums, and he used a rubber until hishand grew tired.  He then tied a piece of rubber on the end of a stick and worked it like a plane.  His little girl came and said, Why, you have a patent, havent you?  The fathersaid afterward, My daughter told me when I took the stick and put the rubber on the end that there was a patent, and that was the first thought of that. He went to Boston andapplied for his patent, and every one of you that has a rubber-tipped pencil in your pocket is now paying tribute to the millionaire.  All was income, all the way up into the millions. But let me hasten to one other greater thought.  Show me the great men and women who live in Philadelphia.  A gentleman over there will get up and say:  Wedont have any great men in Philadelphia.  They dont live here.  They live away off in Rome or St. Petersburg orLondon or Manayunk, or anywhere else but here in our town.  I have come now to theapex of my thought.  I have come now to the heart of the whole matter and to the center ofmy struggle:  Why isnt Philadelphia a greater city in its greater wealth?  Why does NewYork excel Philadelphia?  People say, Because of her harbor.  Why do many other citiesof the United States get ahead of Philadelphia now?  There is only one answer, and that isbecause our own people talk down their own city.  If there ever was a community on earththat has to be forced ahead, it is the city of Philadelphia.  If we are to have a boulevard,talk it down; if we are going to have better schools, talk them down; if you wish to havewise legislation, talk it down; talk all the proposed improvements down.  That is the only great wrong that I can lay at the feet of the magnificent Philadelphia that has been souniversally kind to me.  I say it is time we turn around in our city and begin to talk up thethings that are in our city, and begin to set them before the world as the people ofChicago, New York, St. Louis, and San Francisco do.  Oh, if we only could get that spiritout among our people, that we can do things in Philadelphia and do them well! Arise, you millions of Philadelphians, trust in God and man, and believe in the greatopportunities that are right here-not over in New York or Boston, but here-for business, for everything that is worth living for on earth.  There was never an opportunity greater.  Let ustalk up our won city. But there are two other young men here to-night, and that is all I will venture to say,because it is too late.  One over there gets up and says, There is going to bea great man in Philadelphia, but never was one.  Oh, is that so?  When are you going to be great?When I am elected to some political office.  Young man, wont you learn a lesson in the primer of politics that is a prima facie evidence of littleness to hold office under our formof government?  Great men get into office sometimes, but what this country needs is men that will do what we tell them to do.  This nation-Where the people rule-is governed by thepeople, for the people, and so long as it is, then the office-holder is but the servant of the people, and the Bible says the servant cannot be greater than the master.  The Biblesays, He that is sent cannot be greater than Him who sent Him. The people rule, orshould rule; and if they do, we do not need the greater men in office.  If the great men inAmerica took our offices, we would change to an empire in the next ten years. I know of a great many young women, now that womans suffrage is coming, who say, I am going to be President of the United States some day.  I believe inwomans suffrage, and there is no doubt but what is coming, and I am getting out of the way, anyhow.  I maywant an office by and by myself; but if the ambition of an office influences the women intheir desire to vote, I want to say right here what I say to the young men, that if you onlyget the privilege of casting one vote, you dont get anything that is worth while.  Unlessyou can control more than one vote, you will be unknown, and your influence so dissipated as practically not to be felt.  This country isnot run by votes.  Do you think it is?  It is governed by influence.  It is governed by the ambitions and the enterprises which control votes.  The young woman that thinksshe is going to vote for the sake of holding an office is making an awful blunder. That other young man gets up and says, There are going to great men in this countryand in Philadelphia.  Is that so?  When?  When there comes a great war,when we get into difficulty through watchful waiting in Mexico; when we get into war with England oversome frivolous deed, or with Japan or China or New Jersey or some distant country.  ThenI will march up to the cannons mouth; I will sweep up among the glistening bayonets; Iwill leap into the arena and tear down the flag and bear it away in triumph.  I will comehome with stars on my shoulder, and hold every office in the gift of the nation, and I willbe great.  No, you wont.  You think you are going to be made great by an office, butremember that if you are not great before you get the office, you wont be great when yousecure it.  It will only be a burlesque in that shape. We had a Peace Jubilee here after the Spanish War.  Out West they dont believe this, because they said, Philadelphia would not have heard of any Spanish Waruntil fifty years hence.  Some of you saw the procession go up Broad Street, I was away, but thefamily wrote to me that the tally-ho coach with Lieutenant Hobson upon it stopped right at the front door and the people shouted, Hurrah for Hobson! and if I had been there I wouldhave yelled too, because he deserves much more of his country than he has ever received.  But suppose I go into school and say, Who sunk the Merrimac at Santiago?  and if the bys answer me, Hobson, they will tell meseven-eighths of a lie.  There were seven other heroes on that steamer, and they, by virtue of their position, were continuallyexposed to the Spanish fire, while Hobson, as an officer, might reasonably be behind the smoke-stack.  You have gathered in this house your most intelligent people, and yet,perhaps, not one here can name the other seven men. We ought not to so teach history.  We ought to teach that, however humble a mans station may be, if he does his full duty in that place he is just as muchentitled to the American peoples honor as is the king upon his throne.  But we do not so teach.  We are now teaching everywhere that the generals do all the fighting. I remember that, after the war, I went down to see General Robert E. Lee, thatmagnificent Christian gentleman of whom both North and South are now proud as one of our great Americans.  The general told me about his servant, Rastus, who was anenlisted colored soldier.  He called him in one day to make fun of him, and said,Rastus, I hear that all the rest of your company are killed, and why are you not killed?  Rastuswinked at him and said, Cause when there is any fightin goin on I stayback with the generals. I remember another illustration. I would leave it out but for the fact that when you go to the library to read this lecture, you will find this has been printed in it fortwenty-five years.  I shut my eyes-shut them close-and lo! I see the faces of my youth.  Yes, they sometimes say to me, You hair is not white; you are working night andday without seeming ever to stop; you can't be old.  But when I shut my eyes, like any other man of my years, oh,then come trooping back the faces of the loved and lost of long ago, and I know, whatever men may say, it is evening-time. I shut my eyes now and look back to my native town in Massachusetts, and I see the cattle-show ground on the mountain-top; I can see the horse-sheds there.  Ican see the Congregational church; see the town hall and mountaineers cottages; see a greatassembly of people turning out, dressed resplendently, and I can see flags flying and handkerchiefs waving and hear bands playing. I can see that company of soldiers thathad re-enlisted marching up on that cattle-show ground.  I was but a boy, but I was captain of that company and puffed out with pride.  A cambric needle would have burst me all to pieces.  Then I thought it was the greatest event that ever cameto man on earth.  If you have ever thought you would like to be king or queen, you go and be received by themayor. The bands played, and all the people turned out to receive us. I marched up that Common so proud at the head of my troops, and we turned down into the townhall.  Then they seated my soldiers down the center aisle and I sat down on the front seat.  A greatassembly of people-a hundred or two-came in to fill the town hall, so that they stood up all around.  Then the town officers came in and formed a half-circle.  The mayor of the town sat in the middle of the platform.  He was a man who hadnever held office before; but he was a good man, and his friends have told me that I might use this without giving themoffense.  He was a good man, but he thought an office made a man great.  He came up and took his seat, adjusted his powerful spectacles, and looked around, when hesuddenly spied me sitting there on the front seat. He came right forward on the platform and invited me up to sit with the town officers.  No town officer ever took any notice of me before I went to war, except to advise theteacher to thrash me, and now I was invited up on the stand with the town officers.  Oh my! the town mayor was then the emperor, the kind of our day and our time.  As Icame up on the platform they gave me a chair about this far, I would say, from the front. When I had got seated, the chairman of the Selectmen arose and came forward to thetable, and we all supposed he would introduce the Congregational minister, who was the only orator in town, and that he would give the oration to the returning soldiers.  But,friends, you should have seen the surprise which ran over the audience when theydiscovered that the old fellow was going to deliver that speech himself.  He had nevermade a speech in his life, but he fell into the same error that hundreds of other men have fallen into.  It seems so strange that a man wont learn he must speak his piece as a boyif he intends to be an orator when he is grown, but he seems to think all he has to do is to hold an office to be a great orator. So he came up to the front, and brought with him a speech which he had learned by heart walking up and down the pasture, where he had frightened the cattle.  Hebrought the manuscript with him and spread it out on the table so as to be sure he might see it.  He adjusted his spectacles and leaned over it for a moment and marchedback on that platform, and then came forward like this-tramp, tramp, tramp.  He must have studied the subject a great deal, then you come to think of it, because heassumed an elocutionary attitude. He rested heavily upon his left heel, threw back his shoulders, slightly advancedthe right foot, opened the organs of speech, and advanced his right foot at an angle offorty-five.  As he stood in that elocutionary attitude, friends, this is just the way thatspeech went.  Some people say to me, Dont you exaggerate?  That would beimpossible.  But I am here for the lesson and not for the story, and this is the way it wentFellow-citizens"- Oh dear, dear, dear! How little that good man knew about war.  If he had known anything about war at all he ought to have now that any of my G. A. R. comradeshere to-night will tell you is true, that it is next to a crime for an officer of infantry ever in time of danger togo ahead of his men.  I, with my shining sword flashing in the sunlight, shouting to my troops, Come on! I never did it.  Do you suppose I would get in front of my men to be shot in front by the enemy and in the back by my ownmen?  That is no place for an officer.  The place for the officer in actual battle is behind the line.  How often, as a staffofficer, I rode down the line, when our men were suddenly called to the line of a battle, and the Rebel yells were coming out of the woods, and shouted:  Officers to the rear!  Officers to the rear!  Then every officer getsbehind the line of private soldiers, and the higher the officers rank the farther behind he goes.  Not because he is any less brave, but because the laws of war require that. And yet he shouted, I, with my shining sword- In that house there sat the company ofmy soldiers who had carried that boy across the Carolina rivers that he might notwet his feet.  Some of them had gone far out to wet his feet.  Some of them had gone far out to geta pig or a chicken.  Some of them had gone to death under the shell-swept pines in the mountains of Tennessee, yet in the good mans speech they were scarcely known.  Hedid refer to them, but only incidentally.  The hero of the hour was this boy.  Did the nation own him anything?  No, nothing then and nothing now.  Why was he the hero?  Simplybecause that man fell into that same human error-that this boy was great because he was an officer and these were only private soldiers. Oh, I learned the lesson then that I will never forget so long as the tongue of the bell oftime continues to swing for me.  Greatness consists not in the holding of some future office, but really consists in doing great deeds with little means and the accomplishment of vast purposes from the private ranks of life.  To be great at all onemust be great here, now, in Philadelphia.  He who can give to this city better streets and better sidewalks,better schools and more colleges, more happiness and more civilization, more of God, he will be great anywhere.  Let every man or woman here, if you never hear me again,remember this, that if you wish to be great at all, you must begin where you are and what you are, in Philadelphia, now.  He that can give you to his city any blessing, he who can be a good citizen while he lives here,  he that can make better homes, he that can be a blessing whether he works in the shop or sits behind the counter or keeps house,whatever be his life, he who would be great anywhere must first be great in his own Philadelphia. Text Source: Conwell, Russell Herman. Acres of Diamonds. New York: Harper& Brothers 1915. Image Source: U.S. Library of Congress Copyright Status:Text & Image = Public domain. Audio = Uncertain.