[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio. (2)] Ladies and Gentlemen,  I'm only going to talk to you just for a minuteor so this evening, because I have some -- some very sad news for all of you --Could you lower those signs, please? -- I have some very sad newsfor all of you, and, I think, sad news for all of our fellow citizens,and people who love peace all over the world; and that is that Martin LutherKing was shot and was killed tonight in Memphis, Tennessee. Martin Luther King dedicated his life to love and to justice betweenfellow human beings. He died in the cause of that effort. In this difficultday, in this difficult time for the United States, it's perhaps well toask what kind of a nation we are and what direction we want to move in.For those of you who are black -- considering the evidence evidently isthat there were white people who were responsible -- you can be filledwith bitterness, and with hatred, and a desire for revenge. We can move in that direction as a country, in greater polarization-- black people amongst blacks, and white amongst whites, filled with hatredtoward one another. Or we can make an effort, as Martin Luther King did, to understand, andto comprehend, and replace that violence, that stain of bloodshed thathas spread across our land, with an effort to understand, compassion, andlove. For those of you who are black and are tempted to fill with -- be filled with hatredand mistrust of the injustice of such an act, against all white people,I would only say that I can also feel in my own heart the same kind offeeling. I had a member of my family killed, but he was killed by a whiteman. But we have to make an effort in the United States. We have to makean effort to understand, to get beyond, or go beyond these rather difficulttimes. My favorite poem, my -- my favorite poet was Aeschylus. And he once wrote: Even in our sleep, pain which cannot forgetfalls drop by drop upon the heart,until, in our own despair,against our will,comes wisdomthrough the awful grace of God. What we need in the United States is not division; what we need in theUnited States is not hatred; what we need in the United States is not violenceand lawlessness, but is love, and wisdom, and compassion toward one another,and a feeling of justice toward those who still suffer within our country,whether they be white or whether they be black. So I ask you tonight to return home, to say a prayer for the familyof Martin Luther King -- yeah, it's true -- butmore importantlyto say a prayer for our own country, which all of us love -- a prayer forunderstanding and that compassion of which I spoke. We can do well in this country. We will have difficult times. We've had difficult times in the past, but we -- and we will have difficult times in thefuture. It is not the end of violence; it is not the end of lawlessness;and it's not the end of disorder. But the vast majority of white people and the vast majority of blackpeople in this country want to live together, want to improve the qualityof our life, and want justice for all human beings that abide in our land. And let's dedicate ourselves to what the Greeks wrote so many years ago:to tame the savageness of man and make gentle the life of this world. Letus dedicate ourselves to that, and say a prayer for our country and forour people. Thank you very much.  See Also: Documentary trailer for "Ripple of Hope." Audio Source: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Also in this database:      Edward Kennedy - Eulogy for Robert F.       Kennedy Copyright Status: