[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio. (2)] We're here to mark that day in history when the Allied armies joinedin battle to reclaim this continent to liberty. For four long years, muchof Europe had been under a terrible shadow. Free nations had fallen, Jewscried out in the camps, millions cried out for liberation. Europe was enslavedand the world prayed for its rescue. Here, in Normandy, the rescue began.Here, the Allies stood and fought against tyranny, in a giant undertakingunparalleled in human history. We stand on a lonely, windswept point on the northern shore of France.The air is soft, but forty years ago at this moment, the air was densewith smoke and the cries of men, and the air was filled with the crackof rifle fire and the roar of cannon. At dawn, on the morning of the 6thof June, 1944, two hundred and twenty-five Rangers jumped off the British landing craft and ranto the bottom of these cliffs.  Their mission was one of the most difficultand daring of the invasion: to climb these sheer and desolate cliffs andtake out the enemy guns. The Allies had been told that some of the mightiestof these guns were here, and they would be trained on the beaches to stopthe Allied advance. The Rangers looked up and saw the enemy soldiers at the edge of thecliffs, shooting down at them with machine guns and throwing grenades. Andthe American Rangers began to climb. They shot rope ladders over the faceof these cliffs and began to pull themselves up. When one Ranger fell,another would take his place. When one rope was cut, a Ranger would grabanother and begin his climb again. They climbed, shot back, and held theirfooting. Soon, one by one, the Rangers pulled themselves over the top,and in seizing the firm land at the top of these cliffs, they began toseize back the continent of Europe. Two hundred and twenty-five came here.After two days of fighting, only ninety could still bear arms. And behind me is a memorial that symbolizes the Ranger daggers that werethrust into the top of these cliffs. And before me are the men who putthem there. These are the boys of Pointe du Hoc. These are the men who took the cliffs. These are the champions who helped free a continent. And these are the heroes who helped end a war. Gentlemen, I look at you and I thinkof the words of Stephen Spender's poem. You are men who in your "livesfought for life and left the vivid air signed with your honor."  I think I know what you may be thinking right now --thinking "we werejust part of a bigger effort; everyone was brave that day." Well everyonewas. Do you remember the story of Bill Millin of the 51st Highlanders?Forty years ago today, British troops were pinned down near a bridge, waitingdesperately for help. Suddenly, they heard the sound of bagpipes, and somethought they were dreaming. Well, they weren't. They looked up and sawBill Millin with his bagpipes, leading the reinforcements and ignoringthe smack of the bullets into the ground around him.  Lord Lovat was with him -- Lord Lovat of Scotland, who calmly announcedwhen he got tothe bridge, "Sorry, I'm a few minutes late," as if he'd been delayed bya traffic jam, when intruth he'd just come from the bloody fighting on Sword Beach, which heand his men had just taken.  There was the impossible valor of the Poles, who threw themselves betweenthe enemyand the rest of Europe as the invasion took hold; and the unsurpassed courageof theCanadians who had already seen the horrors of war on this coast. They knewwhat awaitedthem there, but they would not be deterred. And once they hit Juno Beach,they neverlooked back. All of these men were part of a roll call of honor with names that spokeof a pride as brightas the colors they bore; The Royal Winnipeg Rifles, Poland's 24th Lancers,the RoyalScots' Fusiliers, the Screaming Eagles, the Yeomen of England's armoreddivisions, theforces of Free France, the Coast Guard's "Matchbox Fleet," and you, theAmericanRangers. Forty summers have passed since the battle that you fought here. You wereyoung the dayyou took these cliffs; some of you were hardly more than boys, with thedeepest joys of lifebefore you. Yet you risked everything here. Why? Why did you do it? Whatimpelled you toput aside the instinct for self-preservation and risk your lives to takethese cliffs? Whatinspired all the men of the armies that met here? We look at you, and somehowwe know the answer. It was faith and belief. It was loyalty and love. The men of Normandy had faith that what they were doing was right, faiththat they foughtfor all humanity, faith that a just God would grant them mercy on thisbeachhead, or on thenext. It was the deep knowledge -- and pray God we have not lost it -- thatthere is a profoundmoral difference between the use of force for liberation and the use offorce for conquest.You were here to liberate, not to conquer, and so you and those othersdid not doubt yourcause. And you were right not to doubt. You all knew that some things are worth dying for. One's country is worthdying for, anddemocracy is worth dying for, because it's the most deeply honorable formof governmentever devised by man. All of you loved liberty. All of you were willingto fight tyranny, and youknew the people of your countries were behind you. The Americans who fought here that morning knew word of the invasion was spreading through the darkness back home. They fought -- or felt in their hearts, though they couldn't know in fact, that in Georgia they were filling the churches at 4:00 am. In Kansas they werekneeling on their porches and praying. And in Philadelphia they were ringingthe Liberty Bell. Something else helped the men of D-day; their rock-hard belief that Providencewould havea great hand in the events that would unfold here; that God was an allyin this great cause.And so, the night before the invasion, when Colonel Wolverton asked hisparachute troopsto kneel with him in prayer, he told them: "Do not bow your heads, but lookup so you cansee God and ask His blessing in what we're about to do." Also, that night,General Matthew Ridgway on his cot, listening in the darkness for the promise God madeto Joshua: "I willnot fail thee nor forsake thee." These are the things that impelled them; these are the things that shapedthe unity of theAllies. When the war was over, there were lives to be rebuilt and governments tobe returned tothe people. There were nations to be reborn. Above all, there was a newpeace to beassured. These were huge and daunting tasks. But the Allies summoned strengthfrom thefaith, belief, loyalty, and love of those who fell here. They rebuilt anew Europe together.There was first a great reconciliation among those who had been enemies,all of whom hadsuffered so greatly. The United States did its part, creating the MarshallPlan to help rebuildour allies and our former enemies. The Marshall Plan led to the Atlanticalliance -- a greatalliance that serves to this day as our shield for freedom, for prosperity,and for peace. In spite of our great efforts and successes, not all that followed theend of the war washappy or planned. Some liberated countries were lost. The great sadnessof this lossechoes down to our own time in the streets of Warsaw, Prague, and EastBerlin. The Soviettroops that came to the center of this continent did not leave when peacecame. They'restill there, uninvited, unwanted, unyielding, almost forty years afterthe war. Because of this,allied forces still stand on this continent. Today, as forty years ago,our armies are here foronly one purpose: to protect and defend democracy. The only territorieswe hold arememorials like this one and graveyards where our heroes rest. We in America have learned bitter lessons from two world wars. It is betterto be here readyto protect the peace, than to take blind shelter across the sea, rushingto respond only afterfreedom is lost. We've learned that isolationism never was and never willbe an acceptableresponse to tyrannical governments with an expansionist intent.But we try always to be prepared for peace, prepared to deter aggression,prepared tonegotiate the reduction of arms, and yes, prepared to reach out again inthe spirit ofreconciliation. In truth, there is no reconciliation we would welcome morethan areconciliation with the Soviet Union, so, together, we can lessen the risksof war, now andforever. It's fitting to remember here the great losses also suffered by the Russianpeople duringWorld War II. Twenty million perished, a terrible price that testifies to allthe world the necessityof ending war. I tell you from my heart that we in the United States donot want war. Wewant to wipe from the face of the earth the terrible weapons that man nowhas in his hands.And I tell you, we are ready to seize that beachhead. We look for somesign from the SovietUnion that they are willing to move forward, that they share our desireand love for peace,and that they will give up the ways of conquest. There must be a changingthere that willallow us to turn our hope into action. We will pray forever that someday that changing will come. But for now,particularly today, itis good and fitting to renew our commitment to each other, to our freedom,and to thealliance that protects it. We're bound today by what bound us       40 years ago, the same loyalties,traditions, andbeliefs. We're bound by reality. The strength of America's allies is vitalto the United States,and the American security guarantee is essential to the continued freedomof Europe's democracies. We were with you then; we're with you now. Your hopes areour hopes, andyour destiny is our destiny. Here, in this place where the West held together, let us make a vow toour dead. Let usshow them by our actions that we understand what they died for. Let ouractions say tothem the words for which Matthew Ridgway listened: "I will not fail theenor forsake thee." Strengthened by their courage and heartened by their value [valor] and borne by theirmemory, let uscontinue to stand for the ideals for which they lived and died. Thank you very much, and God bless you all.    See also:Ronald Reagan: D-Day Address at Omaha Beach, delivered earlier that same day Audio Source: The Mills Center for Public Affairs --Scripps Library and Multimedia Archive Image Source #1: The Ronald Reagan Presidential Library Image #2 Source: Wikipedia.org U.S. Copyright Status: 