[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly fromaudio.] Thank you very much Professor Kombay for that generous introduction. And let me say, that I never expected to hear such kind words from Dr. Falwell. So in return, I have an invitation of my own. On January 20th, 1985, I hope Dr. Falwell will say a prayer at the inauguration of the next Democratic President of the United States. Now, Dr. Falwell, Im not exactly sure how you feel about that. You might not appreciate the President, but the Democrats certainly would appreciate the prayer. Actually, a number of people in Washington were surprised that I was invited to speak here -- and even more surprised when I accepted the invitation. They seem to think that its easier for a camel to pass through the eye of the needle than for a Kennedy to come to the campus of Liberty Baptist College. In honor of our meeting, I have asked Dr. Falwell, as your Chancellor, to permit all the students an extra hour next Saturday night before curfew. And in return, I have promised to watch the Old Time Gospel Hour next Sunday morning. I realize that my visit may be a little controversial. But as many of you have heard, Dr. Falwell recently sent me a membership in the Moral Majority -- and I didn't even apply for it. And I wonder if that means that I'm a member in good standing.  [Falwell: Somewhat] Somewhat, he says.  This is, of course, a nonpolitical speech which is probably best under the circumstances. Since I am not a candidate for President, it would certainly be inappropriate to ask for your support in this election and probably inaccurate to thank you for it in the last one.  I have come here to discuss my beliefs about faith and country,tolerance and truth in America. I know we begin with certain disagreements; and I stronglysuspect that at the end of the evening some of our disagreements will remain. But I alsohope that tonight and in the months and years ahead, we will always respect the right ofothers to differ, that we will never lose sight of our own fallibility, and that we will viewourselves with a sense of perspective and a sense of humor. After all, in the NewTestament, even the Disciples had to be taught to look first to the beam in their owneyes, and only then to the mote in their neighbors eyes. I am mindful of that counsel. I am an American and a Catholic; Ilove my country and treasure my faith. But I do not assume that my conception ofpatriotism or policy is invariably correct, or that my convictions about religion shouldcommand any greater respect than any other faith in this pluralistic society. I believethere surely is such a thing as truth, but who among us can claim a monopoly on it? There are those who do, and their own words testify to theirintolerance. For example, because the Moral Majority has worked with members of differentdenominations, one fundamentalist group has denounced Dr. Falwell for hasteningthe ecumenical church and for "yoking together with Roman Catholics, Mormons, andothers." I am relieved that Dr. Falwell does not regard that as a sin, and on thisissue, he himself has become the target of narrow prejudice. When people agree on publicpolicy, they ought to be able to work together, even while they worship in diverse ways.For truly we are all yoked together as Americans, and the yoke is the happy one ofindividual freedom and mutual respect. But in saying that, we cannot and should not turn aside from adeeper and more pressing question -- which is whether and how religion should influencegovernment. A generation ago, a presidential candidate had to prove his independence ofundue religious influence in public life, and he had to do so partly at the insistence ofevangelical Protestants. John Kennedy said at that time: I believe in an Americawhere there is no  religious bloc voting of any kind. Only twenty years later,another candidate was appealing to a[n] evangelical meeting as a religious bloc. RonaldReagan said to 15 thousand evangelicals at the Roundtable in Dallas:  I know thatyou cant endorse me. I want you to know I endorse you and what you aredoing. To many Americans, that pledge was a sign and a symbol of adangerous breakdown in the separation of church and state. Yet this principle, as vital asit is, is not a simplistic and rigid command. Separation of church and state cannot meanan absolute separation between moral principles and political power. The challenge todayis to recall the origin of the principle, to define its purpose, and refine itsapplication to the politics of the present. The founders of our nation had long and bitter experience with thestate, as both the agent and the adversary of particular religious views. In colonialMaryland, Catholics paid a double land tax, and in Pennsylvania they had to list theirnames on a public roll -- an ominous precursor of the first Nazi laws against the Jews. AndJews in turn faced discrimination in all of the thirteen original Colonies. Massachusettsexiled Roger Williams and his congregation for contending that civil government had noright to enforce the Ten Commandments. Virginia harassed Baptist teachers, and alsoestablished a religious test for public service, writing into the law that no popishfollowers could hold any office. But during the Revolution, Catholics, Jews, and Non-Conformists allrallied to the cause and fought valiantly for the American commonwealth -- for JohnWinthrops city upon a hill. Afterwards, when the Constitution wasratified and then amended, the framers gave freedom for all religion, and from anyestablished religion, the very first place in the Bill of Rights. Indeed the framers themselves professed very differentfaiths: Washington was an Episcopalian, Jefferson a deist, and Adams a Calvinist. Andalthough he had earlier opposed toleration, John Adams later contributed to the buildingof Catholic churches, and so did George Washington. Thomas Jefferson said his proudestachievement was not the presidency, or the writing the Declaration of Independence, butdrafting the Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom. He stated the vision of the firstAmericans and the First Amendment very clearly: The God who gave us life gave usliberty at the same time. The separation of church and state can sometimes be frustrating forwomen and men of religious faith. They may be tempted to misuse government in orderto impose a value which they cannot persuade others to accept. But once we succumb to thattemptation, we step onto a slippery slope where everyones freedom is at risk. Thosewho favor censorship should recall that one of the first books ever burned was the firstEnglish translation of the Bible. As President Eisenhower warned in 1953, Dontjoin the book burners...the right to say ideas, the right to record them, and the right tohave them accessible to others is unquestioned -- or this isnt America. And ifthat right is denied, at some future day the torch can be turned against any other book orany other belief. Let us never forget: Todays Moral Majority could becometomorrows persecuted minority. The danger is as great now as when the founders of the nation firstsaw it. In 1789, their fear was of factional strife among dozens of denominations. Todaythere are hundreds -- and perhaps even thousands of faiths -- and millions of Americans who areoutside any fold. Pluralism obviously does not and cannot mean that all of them are right;but it does mean that there are areas where government cannot and should not decide whatis wrong to believe, to think, to read, and to do. As Professor Larry Tribe, one of thenations leading constitutional scholars has written, Law in a non-theocratic state cannot measure religious truth, nor can the state impose it." The real transgression occurs when religion wants government to tellcitizens how to live uniquely personal parts of their lives. The failure of Prohibitionproves the futility of such an attempt when a majority or even a substantial minorityhappens to disagree. Some questions may be inherently individual ones, or people may besharply divided about whether they are. In such cases, like Prohibition andabortion, the proper role of religion is to appeal to the conscience of the individual,not the coercive power of the state.  But there are other questions which are inherently public in nature,which we must decide together as a nation, and where religion and religious values can andshould speak to our common conscience. The issue of nuclear war is a compelling example.It is a moral issue; it will be decided by government, not by each individual; and to giveany effect to the moral values of their creed, people of faith must speak directly aboutpublic policy. The Catholic bishops and the Reverend Billy Graham have every right tostand for the nuclear freeze, and Dr. Falwell has every right to stand against it. There must be standards for the exercise of such leadership, so thatthe obligations of belief will not be debased into an opportunity for mere politicaladvantage. But to take a stand at all when a question is both properly public and trulymoral is to stand in a long and honored tradition. Many of the great evangelists of the1800s were in the forefront of the abolitionist movement. In our own time, the ReverendWilliam Sloane Coffin challenged the morality of the war in Vietnam. Pope John XXIIIrenewed the Gospels call to social justice. And Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. who wasthe greatest prophet of this century, awakened our nation and its conscience to the evil ofracial segregation.  Their words have blessed our world. And who now wishes they had been silent? Who would bid Pope John Paul [II] to quiet his voice against the oppression inEastern Europe, the violence in Central America, or the crying needs of the landless, thehungry, and those who are tortured in so many of the dark political prisons of our time? President Kennedy, who said that no religious body should seekto impose its will, also urged religious leaders to state their views and give theircommitment when the public debate involved ethical issues. In drawing the line betweenimposed will and essential witness, we keep church and state separate, and at the sametime we recognize that the City of God should speak to the civic duties of men and women. There are four tests which draw that line and define the difference. First, we must respect the integrity of religion itself. People of conscience should be careful how they deal in the word oftheir Lord. In our own history, religion has been falsely invoked to sanction prejudice -- even slavery -- to condemn labor unions and public spending for the poor. I believe thatthe prophecy, "The poor you always have with you" is an indictment, not acommandment. And I respectfully suggest that God has taken no position on the Department of Education -- and that a balanced budget constitutional amendment is a matter of economicanalysis, and not heavenly appeals. Religious values cannot be excluded from every public issue; but notevery public issue involves religious values. And how ironic it is when those very valuesare denied in the name of religion. For example, we are sometimes told that it is wrong tofeed the hungry, but that mission is an explicit mandate given to us in the 25th chapterof Matthew. Second, we must respect the independent judgments of conscience. Those who proclaim moral and religious values can offer counsel, butthey should not casually treat a position on a public issue as a test of fealty to faith.Just as I disagree with the Catholic bishops on tuition tax credits -- which I oppose -- soother Catholics can and do disagree with the hierarchy, on the basis of honest conviction,on the question of the nuclear freeze. Thus, the controversy about the Moral Majority arises not only fromits views, but from its name -- which, in the minds of many, seems to imply that only one setof public policies is moral and only one majority can possibly be right. Similarly, people are and should be perplexed when thereligious lobbying group Christian Voice publishes a morality index of congressionalvoting records, which judges the morality of senators by their attitude toward Zimbabweand Taiwan.  Let me offer another illustration. Dr. Falwell has written -- and Iquote: To stand against Israel is to stand against God. Now there is no one inthe Senate who has stood more firmly for Israel than I have. Yet, I do not doubt the faithof those on the other side. Their error is not one of religion, but of policy. And I hopeto be able to persuade them that -- that they are wrong in terms of both Americas interest and thejustice of Israels cause. Respect for conscience is most in jeopardy, and the harmony of ourdiverse society is most at risk, when we re-establish, directly or indirectly, a religioustest for public office. That relic of the colonial era, which is specifically prohibitedin the Constitution, has reappeared in recent years. After the last election, the ReverendJames Robison -- Robison warned President Reagan no to surround himself, as president before him had,with the counsel of the ungodly. I utterly reject any such standard for anyposition anywhere in public service. Two centuries ago, the victims were Catholics andJews. In the 1980s the victims could be atheists; in some other day or decade, they couldbe the members of the Thomas Road Baptist Church. Indeed, in 1976 I regarded it asunworthy and un-American when some people said or hinted that Jimmy Carter should not bepresident because he was a born again Christian. We must never judge the fitness ofindividuals to govern on the bas[is] of where they worship, whether they follow Christ orMoses, whether they are called born again or ungodly. Where it isright to apply moral values to public life, let all of us avoid the temptation to beself-righteous and absolutely certain of ourselves. And if that temptation ever comes, letus recall Winston Churchills humbling description of an intolerant and inflexiblecolleague: There but for the grace of God goes God. Third, in applying religious values, we must respect the integrityof public debate. In that debate, faith is no substitute for facts. Critics may opposethe nuclear freeze for what they regard as moral reasons. They have every right to arguethat any negotiation with the Soviets is wrong, or that any accommodation with themsanctions their crimes, or that no agreement can be good enough and therefore allagreements only increase the chance of war. I do not believe that, but it surely does notviolate the standard of fair public debate to say it. What does violate that standard, what the opponents of the nuclearfreeze have no right to do, is to assume that they are infallible, and so any argumentagainst the freeze will do, whether it is false or true. The nuclear freeze proposal is not unilateral, but bilateral -- withequal restraints on the United States and the Soviet Union. The nuclear freeze does not require that we trust the Russians, butdemands full and effective verification. The nuclear freeze does not concede a Soviet lead in nuclearweapons, but recognizes that human beings in each great power already have in theirfallible hands the overwhelming capacity to remake into a pile of radioactive rubble theearth which God has made.  There is no morality -- There is no morality in the mushroom cloud. The black rain ofnuclear ashes will fall alike on the just and the unjust. And then it will be too late to wishthat we had done the real work of this atomic age -- which is to seek a world that isneither red nor dead. I am perfectly prepared to debate the nuclear freeze on policygrounds, or moral ones. But we should not be forced to discuss phantom issues or falsecharges. They only deflect us form the urgent task of deciding how best to prevent aplanet divided from becoming a planet destroyed. And it does not advance the debate to contend that the arms race ismore divine punishment than human problem, or that in any event, the final days are near.As Pope John said two decades ago, at the opening of the Second Vatican Council: Wemust beware of those who burn with zeal, but are not endowed with much sense... we mustdisagree with the prophets of doom, who are always forecasting disasters, as though the endof the earth was at hand. The message which echoes across the years is very clear: Theearth is still here; and if we wish to keep it, a prophecy of doom is no alternative to apolicy of arms control. Fourth, and finally, we must respect the motives of those whoexercise their right to disagree. We sorely test our ability to live together if we readilyquestion each others integrity. It may be harder to restrain our feelings when moralprinciples are at stake, for they go to the deepest wellsprings of our being. But the moreour feelings diverge, the more deeply felt they are, the greater is our obligation togrant the sincerity and essential decency of our fellow citizens on the other side. Those who favor E.R.A [Equal Rights Amendment] are notantifamily or blasphemers. And their purpose is not an attackon the Bible. Rather, we believe this is the best way to fix in our nationalfirmament the ideal that not only all men, but all people are created equal. Indeed, mymother, who strongly favors E.R.A., would be surprised to hear that she is anti-family.For my part, I think of the amendments opponents as wrong on the issue, but not aslacking in moral character I could multiply the instances of name-calling, sometimes on bothsides. Dr. Falwell is not a warmonger. And liberal clergymen arenot, as the Moral Majority suggested in a recent letter, equivalent to Sovietsympathizers. The critics of official prayer in public schools are notPharisees; many of them are both civil libertarians and believers, who thinkthat families should pray more at home with their children, and attend church andsynagogue more faithfully. And people are not sexist because they stand against abortion, and they are not murderers because they believe in free choice.Nor does it help anyone -- Nor does it help anyones cause to shout such epithets, or to try and shout a speaker down -- which is what happened last April when Dr. Falwell washissed and heckled at Harvard. So I am doubly grateful for your courtesy here this evening. Thatwas not Harvards finest hour, but I am happy to say that the loudest applause fromthe Harvard audience came in defense of Dr. Falwells right to speak. In short, I hope for an America where neither "fundamentalist" nor"humanist" will be a dirty word, but a fair description of the different ways in whichpeople of goodwill look at life and into their own souls. I hope for an America where no president, no public official, noindividual will ever be deemed a greater or lesser American because of religious doubt -- orreligious belief. I hope for an America where the power of faith will always burnbrightly, but where no modern Inquisition of any kind will ever light the fires of fear,coercion, or angry division. I hope for an America where we can all contend freely andvigorously, but where we will treasure and guard those standards of civility which alonemake this nation safe for both democracy and diversity. Twenty years ago this fall, in New York City, President Kennedy metfor the last time with a Protestant assembly. The atmosphere had been transformed sincehis earlier address during the 1960 campaign to the Houston Ministerial Association. Hehad spoken there to allay suspicions about his Catholicism, and to answer those who claimed that on the day of his baptism, he was somehow disqualified frombecoming President. His speech in Houston and then his election drove that prejudice from thecenter of our national life. Now, three years later, in November of 1963, he was appearingbefore the Protestant Council of New York City to reaffirm what he regarded as somefundamental truths. On that occasion, John Kennedy said: The family of man is notlimited to a single race or religion, to a single city, or country...the family of man isnearly 3 billion strong. Most of its members are not white and most of them are notChristian. And as President Kennedy reflected on that reality, he restated an idealfor which he had lived his life -- that the members of this family should be at peacewith one another. That ideal shines across all the generations of our history and allthe ages of our faith, carrying with it the most ancient dream. For as the Apostle Paulwrote long ago in Romans: If it be possible, as much as it lieth in you, livepeaceably with all men. I believe it is possible; the choice lies within us; as fellowcitizens, let us live peaceable with each other; as fellow human beings, let us strive tolive peaceably with men and women everywhere. Let that be our purpose and ourprayer, yours and mine -- for ourselves, for our country, and for all the world.  Also in this database: Edward M. Kennedy - Eulogy for Robert F. Kennedy Copyright Status:Text = Uncertain. Audio & Image (Screenshot) = Restricted, seek permission.