[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly from audio]1  Senator McCarthy: Mr. Chairman, in view of that request by Mr. --  Senator Mundt:  Senator McCarthy: Not exactly, Mr. Chairman. But in view of Mr. Welch's requestthat the information be given once we know of anyone who might be performingany work for the Communist Party, I think we should tell him that he has in his lawfirm a young man named Fisher whom he recommended, incidentally, to dothe work on this committee, who has been, for a number of years, a member of an organizationwhich is named, oh, years and years ago, as the legal bulwark of the Communist Party, an organization which always springs to the defense of anyonewho dares to expose Communists. I certainly assume that Mr. Welch did not know of this young man at the time he recommended as the assistant counsel for this committee. But he has terror and such a great desire to know where anyone is located who may be serving the communist cause, Mr. Welch. And I thought we should just call your attention to the fact that your Mr. Fisher, who is still in your law firm today, whom you asked to have down here looking over the secret and classified material, is a member of an organization, not named by me, but named by various committees, named by the Attorney General, as I recall. And be belonged to it long after it had been exposed as the legal arm of the Communist Party.   Senator McCarthy: Knowing that, Mr. Welch, I just felt that I had a duty to respond toyour urgent request that "before sundown," when we know of anyoneserving the Communist cause we let the agency know.Now, we're now lettingyou know that your man did belong to this organization for either threeor four years, belonged to it long after he was out of law school.Now I have hesitated bringing that up, but I have been rather bored withyour phony requests to Mr. Cohn here, that he, personally, get everyCommunist out of Government before sundown; therefore we will give you the information about the young man in your own organization. Now, I'm not asking you at this time to explain why you tried to foist him on this committee; that you did, the committee knows. Whether you knew that he was a member of that Communist organization or not, I don't know.I assume you did not, Mr. Welch, because I get the impression that while you are quite an actor, you play for a laugh, I don't think you have any conception of the danger of the Communist Party. I don't think you, yourself, would ever knowingly aid the Communist cause.I think you're unknowingly aiding it when you try to burlesque this hearing in which we're attempting to bring out the facts, however.  Mr. Welch: Mr. Chairman. Senator Mundt: The Chair should say that he has no recognition -- no -- no memory ofMr. Welch recommending either Mr. Fisher or anybody else as counsel forthis committee. Mr. Welch: Mr. Chairman. Senator Mundt:   Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch:  Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch: Senator Mundt: Mr. Welch:  Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch:   Senator McCarthy: I -- I can listen with one ear and talk with [him].  Mr. Welch: Now, this time, sir --  Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch: -- I want you to listen with both.  Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch:   Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch:  Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch: Senator -- Senator Mundt:  Mr. Welch: You won't need anything in the record when I finishtelling you this.Until this moment, Senator, I think I never reallygauged your cruelty, or your recklessness. Fred Fisher is a young man whowent to the Harvard Law School and came into my firm and is starting whatlooks to be a brilliant career with us. When I decided to work for this committee, I asked Jim St. Clair, who sits on my right, to be my first assistant.I said to Jim, "Pick somebody in the firm to work under you that you wouldlike." He chose Fred Fisher, and they came down on an afternoon plane.That night, when we had taken a little stab at trying to see what the caseis about, Fred Fisher and Jim St. Clair and I went to dinner together.I then said to these two young men, "Boys, I don't know anything aboutyou except I've always liked you. But if there's anything funny in thelife of either one of you that would hurt anybody in this case, you speakup quick." Mr. Welch: And Fred Fisher said, "Mr. Welch, when I was in the law school, andfor a period of months after, I belonged to the Lawyers' Guild," (as youhave suggested, Senator). He went on to say, "I am Secretary of the YoungRepublican's League in Newton with the son of [the] Massachusetts governor,and I have the respect and admiration of my community, and I'm sure I have the respect and admirationof the twenty-five lawyers or so in Hale & Dorr." And I said, "Fred,I just don't think I'm going to ask you to work on the case.If Ido, one of these days that will come out, and go over national television,and it will just hurt like the dickens." And so, Senator, I asked him togo back to Boston. Little did I dream you could be so reckless and so cruelas to do an injury to that lad. It is true he is still with Hale & Dorr. It is true that he will continue to be with Hale & Dorr. It is, I regret to say, equally true thatI fear he shall always bear a scar needlessly inflicted by you.Ifit were in my power to forgive you for your reckless cruelty, Iwould do so. I like to think I'm a gentle man, but your forgiveness willhave to come from someone other than me.  Senator McCarthy: Senator Mundt:   Senator McCarthy:  Mr. Welch:  Senator McCarthy:  Mr. Welch:   Senator McCarthy:  Mr. Welch:   Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch: Mr. Cohn: No, sir.  Mr. Welch: Mr. Cohn: No, sir. Mr. Welch:  Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch:   Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch:  Senator McCarthy:  Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch:  Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch:  Senator McCarthy: Senator Mundt:  Senator McCarthy:  Senator Mundt:   Senator McCarthy: Mr. Welch:   1 See Also:George Mason University's History Matters offers an apparently more completetranscript of the above episode (and see their source at page bottom). Page Updated: 10/31/16 Copyright Status: