[AUTHENTICITY CERTIFIED: Text version below transcribed directly from audio. (2)] Thank you very much, Governor Keating and Mrs. Keating, ReverendGraham, to the families of those who have been lost and wounded, to the people of OklahomaCity, who have endured so much, and the people of this wonderful state, to all of you whoare here as our fellow Americans. I am honored to be here today to represent the American people. ButI have to tell you that Hillary and I also come as parents, as husband and wife, as peoplewho were your neighbors for some of the best years of our lives. Today our nation joins with you in grief. We mourn with you. Weshare your hope against hope that some may still survive. We thank all those who haveworked so heroically to save lives and to solve this crime -- those here in Oklahoma andthose who are all across this great land, and many who left their own lives to come hereto work hand in hand with you. We pledge to do all we can to help you heal the injured, to rebuildthis city, and to bring to justice those who did this evil. This terrible sin took the lives of our American family, innocentchildren in that building, only because their parents were trying to be good parents aswell as good workers; citizens in the building going about their daily business; and manythere who served the rest of us -- who worked to help the elderly and the disabled, whoworked to support our farmers and our veterans, who worked to enforce our laws and toprotect us. Let us say clearly, they served us well, and we are grateful. But for so many of you they were also neighbors and friends. You sawthem at church or the PTA meetings, at the civic clubs, at the ball park. You know them inways that all the rest of America could not. And to all the members of the families herepresent who have suffered loss, though we share your grief, your pain is unimaginable, andwe know that. We cannot undo it. That is God's work. Our words seem small beside the loss you have endured. But I found afew I wanted to share today. I've received a lot of letters in these last terrible days.One stood out because it came from a young widow and a mother of three whose own husbandwas murdered with over 200 other Americans when Pan Am 103 was shot down. Here is whatthat woman said I should say to you today: The anger you feel is valid, but you must not allow yourselves to beconsumed by it. The hurt you feel must not be allowed to turn into hate, but instead intothe search for justice. The loss you feel must not paralyze your own lives. Instead, youmust try to pay tribute to your loved ones by continuing to do all the things they leftundone, thus ensuring they did not die in vain. Wise words from one who also knows. You have lost too much, but you have not lost everything. And youhave certainly not lost America, for we will stand with you for as many tomorrows as ittakes. If ever we needed evidence of that, I could only recall the words ofGovernor and Mrs. Keating: If anybody thinks that Americans are mostly mean and selfish,they ought to come to Oklahoma. If anybody thinks Americans have lost thecapacity for love and caring and courage, they ought to come to Oklahoma. To all my fellow Americans beyond this hall, I say, one thing we owethose who have sacrificed is the duty to purge ourselves of the dark forces which gaverise to this evil. They are forces that threaten our common peace, our freedom, our way oflife. Let us teach our children that the God of comfort is also the God ofrighteousness: Those who trouble their own house will inherit the wind. Let us let our own children know that we will stand against theforces of fear. When there is talk of hatred, let us stand up and talk against it. Whenthere is talk of violence, let us stand up and talk against it. In the face of death, letus honor life. As St. Paul admonished us, Let us "not be overcome by evil, but overcomeevil with good."2 Yesterday, Hillary and I had the privilege of speaking with somechildren of other federal employees -- children like those who were lost here. And onelittle girl said something we will never forget. She said, "We should all plant a tree inmemory of the children." So this morning before we got on the plane to come here, at theWhite House, we planted that tree in honor of the children of Oklahoma. It was a dogwood with its wonderful spring flower and its deep,enduring roots. It embodies the lesson of the Psalms -- that the life of a good person islike a tree whose leaf does not wither. My fellow Americans, a tree takes a long time to grow, and woundstake a long time to heal. But we must begin. Those who are lost now belong to God. Someday we will be with them. But until that happens, their legacy must be our lives. Thank you all, and God bless you. 1 Proverbs 11:29 -- "He who troubles his own house will inherit the wind, and the fool will be servant to the wise of heart." (NKJV) 2 3 See Also:Late Draft of the Speech w/ Edits.pdf Audio, Image and Late Draft Document Source:William J. Clinton Library & Museum Copyright Status: 